Chemical Safety Board: Improvements in Management and Oversight  
Are Needed (22-AUG-08, GAO-08-864R).				 
                                                                 
The principal role of the Chemical Safety and Hazard		 
Investigation Board (CSB) is to investigate accidental releases  
of regulated or extremely hazardous substances to determine the  
conditions and circumstances that led to the accident and to	 
identify the cause or causes so that similar accidents might be  
prevented. Accidental releases of these toxic and hazardous	 
chemicals occur frequently and often have serious consequences.  
CSB reported to Congress that the agency received notification of
approximately 900 chemical accidents in calendar year 2007, and  
that 31 of these accidents were serious or even fatal events that
warranted the commitment of CSB investigators. CSB began	 
operating in 1998 as an independent agency created under the	 
Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990. The act directs CSB to (1)	 
investigate and report on the cause or probable cause of any	 
accidental chemical releases from stationary sources resulting in
a fatality, serious injury, or substantial property damages; (2) 
make recommendations to reduce the likelihood or consequences of 
accidental chemical releases and propose corrective measures; and
(3) establish regulations for reporting accidental releases. The 
agency publishes investigative reports and issues safety studies 
and videos to help prevent future accidents. Congress modeled CSB
after the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), which has 
a similar public safety mission. Like NTSB, CSB has no		 
enforcement authority and a limited regulatory role. As outlined 
in the authorizing statute, CSB is to be managed by a five-member
board. Currently the board has one vacancy. CSB received an	 
appropriation of $9.4 million for fiscal year 2008 and had 39	 
staff as of January 30, 2008.					 
-------------------------Indexing Terms------------------------- 
REPORTNUM:   GAO-08-864R					        
    ACCNO:   A83716						        
  TITLE:     Chemical Safety Board: Improvements in Management and    
Oversight Are Needed						 
     DATE:   08/22/2008 
  SUBJECT:   Accident prevention				 
	     Accountability					 
	     Chemical accidents 				 
	     Data collection					 
	     Environmental monitoring				 
	     Federal regulations				 
	     Hazardous substances				 
	     Independent agencies				 
	     Internal controls					 
	     Investigations by federal agencies 		 
	     Quality control					 
	     Regulatory agencies				 
	     Reporting requirements				 
	     Risk management					 
	     Safety regulation					 
	     Safety standards					 
	     Strategic planning 				 
	     Toxic substances					 
	     Policies and procedures
