Higher Education: Veteran Students Received Similar Amounts of	 
Title IV Aid As Nonveterans but More Total Aid with GI Benefits  
(20-JUN-08, GAO-08-741).					 
                                                                 
Over the past decade, average college tuition and fees increased 
between 20 and 38 percent, depending on the type of institution. 
This rising cost of college affects all students--both veteran	 
and nonveteran students--who rely on a mix of family resources,  
grants, scholarships, loans, and work-study to finance their	 
education. Students may face particular hardships when the cost  
of attendance outpaces students' available resources. For	 
example, some lenders recently have tightened the eligibility	 
criteria for obtaining student loans in response to problems in  
financial markets. In fiscal year 2007, the Department of	 
Education (Education) provided $82 billion in financial aid in	 
the form of grants, loans, and work-study programs under Title IV
of the Higher Education Act of 1965, as amended, to 11 million	 
students and their families. The primary Title IV aid programs	 
include Pell Grants, Stafford Loans, and campus-based aid	 
programs. Veterans also may be eligible for federal financial aid
from the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA). VA awarded about $2
billion in Chapter 30 education benefits under the Montgomery GI 
Bill1 (Chapter 30 GI benefits) to more than 300,000 veteran	 
students in fiscal year 2007. In 2002, we reported that veteran  
students were awarded similar amounts of Title IV aid as	 
nonveteran students, and veterans' total federal aid was greater 
when Chapter 30 GI benefits were included. Congress asked about  
whether this has changed, resulting in veterans receiving less	 
federal financial aid. To address this question, Congress asked  
us to determine (1) how the amount of Title IV financial aid	 
awarded to veteran students compares with that awarded to	 
nonveteran students, (2) how higher education institutions	 
allocate Title IV financial aid among veteran and nonveteran	 
students, and (3) how federal agencies and higher education	 
institutions provide information to veterans on Title IV	 
financial aid.							 
-------------------------Indexing Terms------------------------- 
REPORTNUM:   GAO-08-741 					        
    ACCNO:   A82462						        
  TITLE:     Higher Education: Veteran Students Received Similar      
Amounts of Title IV Aid As Nonveterans but More Total Aid with GI
Benefits							 
     DATE:   06/20/2008 
  SUBJECT:   Aid for education					 
	     Data collection					 
	     Education						 
	     Education or training costs			 
	     Education program evaluation			 
	     Educational grants 				 
	     Eligibility determinations 			 
	     Federal aid programs				 
	     Financial management				 
	     Grants						 
	     Higher education					 
	     Loans						 
	     Military personnel 				 
	     Performance measures				 
	     Program evaluation 				 
	     Program management 				 
	     Student financial aid				 
	     Students						 
	     Veterans benefits					 
	     Veterans education 				 
	     Program implementation				 
	     Dept. of Education Title IV Program
