Hurricane Katrina: Continuing Debris Removal and Disposal Issues 
(25-AUG-08, GAO-08-985R).					 
                                                                 
In 2005, as a result of Hurricane Katrina, more than 1,600 people
lost their lives and more than a million were driven from their  
homes on the Gulf Coast. Tens of thousands of homes in New	 
Orleans were flooded, many requiring either demolition or gutting
before reconstruction. Nearly 3 years later, the New Orleans area
still faces significant debris management issues and challenges. 
For example, the Louisiana Department of Environmental Quality	 
(LDEQ) stated that while the Department of Homeland Security's	 
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) estimated in July 2008
that it had funded about 16,900 home demolitions, an estimated	 
6,100 homes remained to be demolished around the New Orleans	 
area. The Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency	 
Assistance Act (Stafford Act) establishes programs and processes 
for the federal government to provide major disaster and	 
emergency assistance to states, local governments, tribal	 
nations, and others. FEMA has the responsibility for		 
administering the provisions of the Stafford Act, including	 
approving and funding the assistance provided under it. This	 
assistance has been provided to the Gulf Coast under the	 
Department of Homeland Security's National Response Framework	 
(formerly called the National Response Plan). In New Orleans, the
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (Corps of Engineers) was the primary
federal agency responsible for providing debris removal and	 
disposal until it concluded its response activities in September 
2007. The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), the coordinator 
of federal emergency support for oil and hazardous materials	 
releases, also assisted the Corps of Engineers and LDEQ with	 
debris removal and disposal and continues to undertake Katrina	 
response activities, such as monitoring landfill operations. The 
federal law addressing the management of hazardous and other	 
solid wastes--the Resource Conservation and Recovery		 
Act--addresses nonhazardous solid wastes under subtitle D. The	 
act prohibits "open dumping"--the disposal of solid waste in	 
landfills failing to meet the relevant criteria--and requires	 
state plans to prohibit the establishment of open dumps. RCRA	 
provides EPA with limited authority to address environmental	 
problems at solid waste landfills. The Water Resources		 
Development Act of 2007 directed GAO to address certain 	 
activities related to debris management in the wake of Hurricane 
Katrina. We briefed relevant committee staff on the results of	 
our work on March 6, 2008, and held subsequent discussions with  
them in March and April 2008. We are following up with this	 
report, which provides more detail on the topics covered in the  
briefing. This report describes (1) key plans and practices	 
federal and state agencies are currently using to oversee debris 
removal and disposal in response to Hurricane Katrina in New	 
Orleans, (2) enforcement actions state and federal agencies have 
taken related to Katrina debris removal and disposal, and (3)	 
actions by LDEQ and EPA in response to potential environmental	 
issues at the Gentilly Landfill in New Orleans. 		 
-------------------------Indexing Terms------------------------- 
REPORTNUM:   GAO-08-985R					        
    ACCNO:   A83752						        
  TITLE:     Hurricane Katrina: Continuing Debris Removal and Disposal
Issues								 
     DATE:   08/25/2008 
  SUBJECT:   Asbestos						 
	     Demolition 					 
	     Disaster recovery					 
	     Disaster recovery plans				 
	     Disaster relief aid				 
	     Emergency response plans				 
	     Environmental law					 
	     Environmental monitoring				 
	     Federal aid to states				 
	     Federal regulations				 
	     Federal/state relations				 
	     Hazardous substances				 
	     Hurricane Katrina					 
	     Local governments					 
	     Natural disasters					 
	     Needs assessment					 
	     Program evaluation 				 
	     Program management 				 
	     Property disposal					 
	     Solid waste management				 
	     Waste disposal					 
	     Waste management					 
	     National Response Framework			 
	     New Orleans (LA)
