Federal Real Property: Property Conveyances between the District 
of Columbia and the Federal Government Await Completion, and	 
Development Will Take Many Years (13-JUN-08, GAO-08-684).	 
                                                                 
The Federal and District of Columbia Government Real Property Act
of 2006 (Public Law 109-396) mandated GAO's review of the	 
property exchange between the District and the federal		 
government. None of the conveyances had occurred by the beginning
of GAO's audit phase. After consulting with the congressional	 
committees specified in the law, GAO developed research questions
that reflect an assessment of property exchanges and development 
progress to date. GAO's objectives were to determine (1) the	 
status of the conveyances and transfers of the properties	 
identified in the law; (2) what steps the District and the	 
federal government have taken toward completing the conveyances, 
what factors have affected their completion, and what additional 
steps remain; (3)what preliminary development has occurred on the
properties exchanged between the District and the federal	 
government, and what are the current plans for use of these	 
properties; and (4)what development challenges the District and  
federal government face going forward. GAO analyzed planning and 
property documents; conducted site visits; and interviewed senior
officials from the District and the Department of the Interior	 
(DOI) among others. DOI and the General Services Administration  
agreed with our findings, while the District and the Architect of
the Capitol (AOC) did not comment on our overall findings. All	 
provided technical clarifications which we incorporated as	 
appropriate.							 
-------------------------Indexing Terms------------------------- 
REPORTNUM:   GAO-08-684 					        
    ACCNO:   A82357						        
  TITLE:     Federal Real Property: Property Conveyances between the  
District of Columbia and the Federal Government Await Completion,
and Development Will Take Many Years				 
     DATE:   06/13/2008 
  SUBJECT:   Environmental cleanups				 
	     Environmental impact statements			 
	     Environmental monitoring				 
	     Federal agencies					 
	     Federal property					 
	     Federal property management			 
	     Federal regulations				 
	     Federal/state relations				 
	     Land management					 
	     Land use						 
	     Land use agreements				 
	     Policy evaluation					 
	     Program evaluation 				 
	     Program management 				 
	     Property disposal					 
	     Real estate transfers				 
	     Real property					 
	     Real property acquisition				 
	     Strategic planning 				 
	     District of Columbia

GAO Highlights: 

Highlights of GAO-08-684, a report to congressional committees. 

Why GAO Did This Study: 

The Federal and District of Columbia Government Real Property Act of 
2006 (Public Law 109-396) mandated GAO’s review of the property 
exchange between the District and the federal government. None of the 
conveyances had occurred by the beginning of GAO’s audit phase. After 
consulting with the congressional committees specified in the law, GAO 
developed research questions that reflect an assessment of property 
exchanges and development progress to date. GAO’s objectives were to 
determine (1) the status of the conveyances and transfers of the 
properties identified in the law; (2) what steps the District and the 
federal government have taken toward completing the conveyances, what 
factors have affected their completion, and what additional steps 
remain; (3)what preliminary development has occurred on the properties 
exchanged between the District and the federal government, and what are 
the current plans for use of these properties; and (4)what development 
challenges the District and federal government face going forward. GAO 
analyzed planning and property documents; conducted site visits; and 
interviewed senior officials from the District and the Department of 
the Interior (DOI) among others. DOI and the General Services 
Administration agreed with our findings, while the District and the 
Architect of the Capitol (AOC) did not comment on our overall findings. 
All provided technical clarifications which we incorporated as 
appropriate. 

What GAO Found: 

No property conveyances between the District and the federal government 
have occurred as of June 6, 2008. All transfers of administrative 
jurisdiction, which do not involve the transfer of title, became 
effective the day (Dec. 15, 2006) that the President signed the Federal 
and District of Columbia Government Real Property Act of 2006. Nine 
conveyances between the Secretary of the Interior and the District, 
excluding Poplar Point, are planned to be completed by the end of 
summer 2008. The District intends to complete the conveyance of Poplar 
Point by the fall of 2009, if it is able to meet several conditions in 
the law, including developing a Secretary of the Interior-approved land-
use plan. The date for the completion of the conveyances of title 
between the General Services Administration and the District is 
uncertain and depends on an agreement between the District and the AOC 
on the District conveying not more than 12 acres of District property 
to the AOC. 

Although the District and the federal government have taken several 
steps to complete the conveyances, several factors have affected their 
efforts, and additional steps must be taken to complete the 
conveyances. The District and the National Park Service formed working 
groups as a first step toward completing the conveyances. However, 
negotiations about cleanup; testing properties for contamination; 
disagreement over land to be conveyed as part of the Boathouse Row 
properties, two properties along the western shores of the Anacostia 
River; and decision changes about environmental impact statement 
development for Poplar Point have slowed the completion of the 
conveyances between the District and Secretary of the Interior. 

Limited development has occurred on property already transferred or to 
be conveyed between the District and the federal government. 
Development will take many years to complete because the District must 
first develop plans for most of these sites. For example, commercial 
and residential development of Poplar Point is not likely to begin 
until 2011 because of the steps, such as the development of a land-use 
plan, which must be completed before the conveyance can occur. 
Development may take over a decade to complete at Poplar Point. 

The District and the federal government face several challenges as they 
move forward to develop or manage the exchanged properties. For 
example, some cleanup and development uncertainties, such as the extent 
and location of the cleanup required, will likely affect the timeliness 
of property development at Poplar Point. Other challenges facing the 
District include (1) transitioning the Deputy Mayor’s Office from 
policymaking and oversight roles to the lead in coordinating 
development, a function that has not been the Deputy Mayor’s Office 
core business, and (2) reaching community agreement about development 
at Poplar Point. 

To view the full product, including the scope and methodology, click on 
[hyperlink, http://www.gao.gov/cgi-bin/getrpt?GAO-08-684]. For more 
information, contact Terrell Dorn at (202) 512-6923 or dornt@gao.gov. 

[End of section]
