Department of Energy: Information on Its Management of Costs and 
Liabilities for Contractors' Pension and Postretirement Benefit  
Plans (19-JUN-08, GAO-08-642R). 				 
                                                                 
For the past 60 years, the Department of Energy (DOE) and its	 
predecessors have carried out their national security,		 
environmental cleanup, and research and development missions	 
through management and operating (M&O) contracts and other site  
contracts for operations at DOE-owned facilities. DOE currently  
has 43 such contracts with private companies and nonprofit	 
organizations, including universities. Under the terms of these  
contracts, DOE reimburses contractors for the costs of providing 
pension and postretirement benefits--including health care,	 
dental, and life insurance benefit plans--for current and former 
employees and their beneficiaries. DOE is ultimately responsible 
for reimbursing its contractors for allowable pension and	 
postretirement benefit plan costs, and records a liability or	 
asset in its financial statements for the funded status--plan	 
obligations less plan assets--of these benefit plans. When these 
contracts are recompeted or expire, it is DOE's policy to ensure 
the continuation of these benefits--and the reimbursement of	 
related costs--for incumbent contractor employees and eligible	 
retirees by, for example, transferring benefit plan sponsorship  
responsibilities to a successor contractor or related company.	 
DOE's contractors sponsor pension plans for their employees,	 
including both traditional pension plans, known as "defined	 
benefit" plans, and 401(k) or similar plans, known as "defined	 
contribution" plans. DOE reimburses contractors on a		 
pay-as-you-go basis for the amount needed to meet the employer's 
annual share of these costs, and these benefit obligations will  
represent an ongoing liability to DOE. In 2007, DOE's financial  
statements reported that contractors contributed $387 million and
$334 million to defined benefit pension and postretirement plans,
respectively. Since September 1996, DOE Order 350.1, Contractor  
Human Resource Management Programs, has set forth DOE's policy	 
for oversight of contractors' pension and other benefit plans. In
particular, Order 350.1 requires that DOE determine whether	 
contractors' benefits costs are reasonable. In April 2006, in	 
response to its large and growing pension and postretirement	 
liabilities for contractor employee benefits, DOE issued Notice  
351.1, Contractor Employee Pension and Medical Benefits Policy.  
Under Notice 351.1, DOE would have continued to reimburse	 
contractors for the allowable benefit costs of existing 	 
"incumbent" employees and eligible retirees, but the Notice would
have limited DOE's reimbursement for new "nonincumbent" employees
to the costs of "market-based" pension and health benefit plans. 
The joint explanatory statement that accompanies the Consolidated
Appropriations Act, 2008, directed us to assess the adequacy of  
DOE's analysis of pension and medical liabilities. In response,  
and in consultation with your staffs, we are providing		 
information on (1) DOE's analysis supporting its approval of the 
April 2006 policy changes contained in Notice 351.1, (2) DOE's	 
liabilities broken out by contractors' defined benefit pension	 
and postretirement plan components and among its M&O and other	 
site contracts, and (3) DOE's recent actions to manage its future
costs and liabilities.						 
-------------------------Indexing Terms------------------------- 
REPORTNUM:   GAO-08-642R					        
    ACCNO:   A82438						        
  TITLE:     Department of Energy: Information on Its Management of   
Costs and Liabilities for Contractors' Pension and Postretirement
Benefit Plans							 
     DATE:   06/19/2008 
  SUBJECT:   401(k) plans					 
	     Agency missions					 
	     Allowable costs					 
	     Contract administration				 
	     Contract oversight 				 
	     Contractor payments				 
	     Contractor personnel				 
	     Cost analysis					 
	     Cost control					 
	     Cost reimbursement contracts			 
	     Data collection					 
	     Documentation					 
	     Employee retirement plans				 
	     Employees						 
	     Financial analysis 				 
	     Financial management				 
	     Financial statements				 
	     Internal controls					 
	     Management and operating contracts 		 
	     Pension plan cost control				 
	     Pensions						 
	     Personal liability (legal) 			 
	     Program evaluation 				 
	     Program management 				 
	     Retirement 					 
	     Retirement benefits				 
	     Strategic planning
