Critical Infrastructure Protection: DHS Needs to Fully Address Lessons Learned from Its First Cyber Storm Exercise
================================================================================

GAO report GAO-08-825  ·  issued 2008-09-09  ·  39 pages  ·  found via: transportation infrastructure safety

GAO-08-825

This text file was formatted by the U.S. Government Accountability 
Office (GAO) to be accessible to users with visual impairments, as part 
of a longer term project to improve GAO products' accessibility. Every 
attempt has been made to maintain the structural and data integrity of 
the original printed product. Accessibility features, such as text 
descriptions of tables, consecutively numbered footnotes placed at the 
end of the file, and the text of agency comment letters, are provided 
but may not exactly duplicate the presentation or format of the printed 
version. The portable document format (PDF) file is an exact electronic 
replica of the printed version. We welcome your feedback. Please E-mail 
your comments regarding the contents or accessibility features of this 
document to Webmaster@gao.gov. 

This is a work of the U.S. government and is not subject to copyright 
protection in the United States. It may be reproduced and distributed 
in its entirety without further permission from GAO. Because this work 
may contain copyrighted images or other material, permission from the 
copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this 
material separately. 

Report to Congressional Requesters
----------------------------------

United States Government Accountability Office
----------------------------------------------
GAO
---

September 2008
--------------

Critical Infrastructure Protection
----------------------------------

DHS Needs to Fully Address Lessons Learned from Its First Cyber Storm 
Exercise
--------

Gao-08-825
----------

Contents
--------

Letter
------

Results in Brief
----------------

Background
----------

DHS Identified Eight Lessons during Cyber Storm I
-------------------------------------------------

DHS Has Demonstrated Progress in Addressing Lessons from Its First Cyber Storm Exercise, but More Remains to Be Done
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Cyber Storm II Participants Observed Progress and Continued Challenges 
in Exercising the National Cyber Response Capability: 

Conclusions
-----------

Recommendation for Executive Action
-----------------------------------

Agency Comments and Our Evaluation
----------------------------------

Appendix I: Objectives, Scope, and Methodology: 

Appendix II: DHS Activities to Address Lessons from Cyber Storm I: 

Appendix III: GAO Analysis of DHS Efforts to Address Lessons from Cyber 
Storm I
-------

Appendix IV: Comments from the Department of Homeland Security: 

Appendix V: GAO Contact and Staff Acknowledgments: 

Tables
------

Table 1: Critical Infrastructure Sectors and Their Lead Agencies: 

Table 2: Recent and Planned Cyber Exercises: 

Table 3: Summary of Status of Activities: 

Table 4: DHS's Planned Activities and the Lessons They Address: 

Figure
------

Figure 1: Activity Status, as of June 2008, by Lesson30: 

Abbreviations
-------------

DHS: Department of Homeland Security: 

ISAC: Information Sharing and Analysis Center: 

NCRCG: National Cyber Response Coordination Group: 

NCSD: National Cyber Security Division: 

US-CERT: United States Computer Emergency Readiness Team: 

[End of section] 

United States Government Accountability Office ---------------------------------------------- Washington, DC 20548
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

September 9, 2008
-----------------

The Honorable Bennie G. Thompson
--------------------------------
Chairman -------- Committee on Homeland Security ------------------------------------------------ House of Representatives
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Honorable James R. Langevin
-------------------------------
Chairman
-------- Subcommittee on Emerging Threats, Cybersecurity, and Science and Technology -------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Committee on Homeland Security -------------------------------------------------------------------------------- House of Representatives
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Since the early 1990s, increasing computer interconnectivity--most 
notably growth in the use of the Internet--has revolutionized the way 
that our government, our nation, and much of the world communicate and 
conduct business. While the benefits of this technology have been 
enormous, this widespread interconnectivity poses significant risks to 
the government's and our nation's computer systems and, more important, 
to the critical operations and infrastructures they support. 

Federal policies establish the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) as 
the focal point for the security of cyberspace--including analysis, 
warning, information sharing, vulnerability reduction, mitigation, and 
recovery efforts for public and private critical infrastructure 
systems.[Footnote 1] To accomplish this mission, DHS is to work with 
federal agencies, state and local governments, and the private sector. 
Federal policy also recognizes the importance of building public/ 
private partnerships because the private sector owns a large percentage 
of the nation's critical infrastructure--including banking and 
financial institutions, telecommunications networks, and energy 
production and transmission facilities. 

As part of DHS's cybersecurity responsibilities, the agency is required 
to coordinate cyber attack simulation exercises to strengthen public 
and private incident response capabilities. One major exercise program, 
called Cyber Storm, is a large-scale simulation of multiple concurrent 
cyber attacks involving the federal government, states, foreign 
governments, and private industry. To date, DHS has conducted Cyber 
Storm exercises in 2006 and 2008, and it is currently planning a third 
for 2010. Because of your interest in these exercises, we agreed to (1) 
identify the lessons that DHS learned from the first Cyber Storm 
exercise, (2) assess DHS's efforts to address the lessons learned from 
this exercise, and (3) identify key participants' views of their 
experiences during the second Cyber Storm exercise. 

To address these objectives, we reviewed relevant DHS documents, 
including the Cyber Storm I Exercise Report, a list of planned post- 
Cyber Storm activities, and artifacts showing actions taken to address 
activities. We attended the second Cyber Storm exercise, held in 
Washington, D.C., in March 2008. We also interviewed DHS officials 
responsible for planning the exercises as well as participants in the 
Cyber Storm exercises, including officials representing three federal 
agencies, three private industry sectors, and one representing state 
governments. In addition, this work builds on a body of work we have 
done over the last several years on the cyber aspects of critical 
infrastructure protection.[Footnote 2] 

We performed our work from January to September 2008 in accordance with 
generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards 
require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, 
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and 
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence 
obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions 
based on our audit objectives. Additional details on our objectives, 
scope, and methodology are provided in appendix I. 

Results in Brief
----------------

As a result of its first Cyber Storm exercise, in February 2006, DHS 
identified eight lessons that had significant impact across sectors, 
agencies, and exercise participants. These lessons involved improving 
(1) the interagency coordination groups; (2) contingency planning, risk 
assessment, and roles and responsibilities; (3) integration of 
incidents across infrastructures; (4) access to information; (5) 
coordination of response activities; (6) strategic communications and 
public relations; (7) processes, tools, and technology; and (8) the 
exercise program. 

While DHS has demonstrated progress in addressing the lessons it 
learned from its first Cyber Storm exercise, more remains to be done to 
fully address the lessons. In the months following its first exercise, 
DHS identified 66 activities that address one or more of the lessons, 
including hosting meetings with key cyber response officials from 
foreign, federal, and state governments and private industry; refining 
operating procedures; and obtaining new tools and technologies to 
support incident response operations. Since that time, DHS has 
completed 42 of these activities.[Footnote 3] However, key activities 
have not yet been completed. DHS identified 16 activities as ongoing 
and 7 as planned for the future. In addition, while DHS identified 
completion dates for its planned activities, it has not identified 
completion dates associated with activities that are reported as 
ongoing. For example, DHS reports that it has work under way to issue 
guidance to information sharing and analysis centers on public 
communications related to cybersecurity, but has not established a 
milestone for completing this activity. Until DHS schedules and 
completes its remaining activities, the agency risks conducting 
subsequent exercises that repeat the lessons learned during the first 
exercise. 

Commenting on their experiences during the second Cyber Storm exercise 
in March 2008, participants observed both progress and continuing 
challenges in building a comprehensive national cyber response 
capability. Their observations addressed several key areas, including 
the value and scope of the exercise, roles and responsibilities, public 
relations, communications, the exercise infrastructure, and the 
handling of classified information. For example, many participants 
reported that their organizations found value in the exercise because 
it led them to update their contact lists and improve their response 
capabilities. Other participants, however, reported the need for 
clarifying the role of the law enforcement community during a cyber 
incident and for improving policies governing the handling of 
classified information so that key information can be shared. Many of 
the challenges noted during Cyber Storm II were similar to ones 
identified during the first exercise. 

We are making a recommendation to the Secretary of Homeland Security to 
direct the Assistant Secretary for Cybersecurity and Communications to 
oversee the completion of corrective activities resulting from Cyber 
Storm I, many of which were reiterated during Cyber Storm II. DHS 
provided written comments on a draft of this report (see app. IV). In 
its comments, DHS concurred with our recommendation and reported that 
the department is working to complete applicable activities identified 
during the first Cyber Storm exercise. DHS officials also provided 
technical comments, which we have incorporated as appropriate. 

Background
----------

Critical infrastructures are physical or virtual systems and assets so 
vital to the nation that their incapacitation or destruction would have 
a debilitating impact on national security, national economic security, 
national public health or safety, or any combination of these matters. 
These systems and assets--such as the electric power grid, chemical 
plants, and water treatment facilities--are essential to the operations 
of the economy and the government. Recent terrorist attacks and threats 
have underscored the need to protect our nation's critical 
infrastructures. If vulnerabilities in these infrastructures are 
exploited, they could be disrupted or disabled, leading to physical 
damage, economic losses, and even loss of life. 

The Federal Government Plays a Critical Role in Helping Secure Critical Infrastructures
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Federal law and policies call for critical infrastructure protection 
activities to enhance the physical and cybersecurity of both public and 
private infrastructures that are essential to national security, 
economic well-being, and national public health and safety.[Footnote 4] 
Federal policies identify 18 critical infrastructure sectors and 
designate certain federal agencies as lead points of contact for each 
(see table 1). Further, they assign these agencies responsibility for 
infrastructure protection activities in their assigned sectors and for 
coordination with other relevant federal agencies, state and local 
governments, and the private sector. In addition, federal policies 
establish DHS as the focal point for the security of cyberspace-- 
including analysis, warning, information sharing, vulnerability 
reduction, mitigation, and recovery efforts for public and private 
critical infrastructure systems. 

Table 1: Critical Infrastructure Sectors and Their Lead Agencies: 

Sector: Agriculture and food; 
Description: Provides for the fundamental need for food. The 
infrastructure includes supply chains for feed and crop production, 
processing, and retail sales; 
Lead agency: Department of Agriculture, Department of Health and Human 
Services, Food and Drug Administration [A]. 

Sector: Banking and finance; 
Description: Provides the financial infrastructure of the nation. This 
sector consists of commercial banks, insurance companies, mutual funds, 
government-sponsored enterprises, pension funds, and other financial 
institutions that carry out transactions, including clearing and 
settlement; 
Lead agency: Department of the Treasury. 

Sector: Chemical; 
Description: Transforms natural raw materials into commonly used 
products benefiting society's health, safety, and productivity. The 
chemical industry produces more than 70,000 products that are essential 
to automobiles, pharmaceuticals, food supply, electronics, water 
treatment, health, construction, and other necessities; 
Lead agency: Department of Homeland Security. 

Sector: Commercial facilities; 
Description: Includes prominent commercial centers, office buildings, 
sports stadiums, theme parks, and other sites where large numbers of 
people congregate to pursue business activities, conduct personal 
commercial transactions, or enjoy recreational pastimes; 
Lead agency: Department of Homeland Security. 

Sector: Commercial nuclear reactors, materials, and waste; 
Description: Includes 104 commercial nuclear reactors; research and 
test nuclear reactors; nuclear materials; and the transportation, 
storage, and disposal of nuclear materials and waste; 
Lead agency: Department of Homeland Security. 

Sector: Dams; 
Description: Comprises approximately 80,000 dam facilities, including 
larger and nationally symbolic dams that are major components of other 
critical infrastructures that provide electricity and water; 
Lead agency: Department of Homeland Security. 

Sector: Defense industrial base; 
Description: Supplies the military with the means to protect the nation 
by producing weapons, aircraft, and ships and providing essential 
services, including information technology and supply and maintenance; 
Lead agency: Department of Defense. 

Sector: Drinking water and water treatment systems; 
Description: Sanitizes the water supply through about 170,000 public 
water systems. These systems depend on reservoirs, dams, wells, 
treatment facilities, pumping stations, and transmission lines; 
Lead agency: Environmental Protection Agency. 

Sector: Emergency services; 
Description: Saves lives and property from accidents and disasters. 
This sector includes fire, rescue, emergency medical services, and law 
enforcement organizations; 
Lead agency: Department of Homeland Security. 

Sector: Energy; 
Description: Provides the electric power used by all sectors and the 
refining, storage, and distribution of oil and gas. This sector is 
divided into electricity and oil and natural gas; 
Lead agency: Department of Energy. 

Sector: Government facilities; 
Description: Includes the buildings owned and leased by the federal 
government for use by federal entities; 
Lead agency: Department of Homeland Security. 

Sector: Information technology; 
Description: Produces hardware, software, and services that enable 
other sectors to function; 
Lead agency: Department of Homeland Security. 

Sector: National monuments and icons; 
Description: Includes key assets that are symbolically identified with 
traditional American values and institutions or U.S. political and 
economic power; 
Lead agency: Department of the Interior. 

Sector: Manufacturing; 
Description: Includes key critical manufacturing operations based on 
highly integrated and interdependent supply chains. This sector 
provides metal, machinery, electrical equipment, appliances, 
components, and transportation equipment; 
Lead agency: Department of Homeland Security. 

Sector: Postal and shipping; 
Description: Delivers private and commercial letters, packages, and 
bulk assets. The United States Postal Service and other carriers 
provide the services of this sector; 
Lead agency: Department of Homeland Security. 

Sector: Public health and health care; 
Description: Mitigates the risk of disasters and attacks and also 
provides recovery assistance if an attack occurs. This sector consists 
of health departments, clinics, and hospitals; 
Lead agency: Department of Health and Human Services. 

Sector: Telecommunications; 
Description: Provides wired, wireless, and satellite communications to 
meet the needs of businesses and governments; 
Lead agency: Department of Homeland Security. 

Sector: Transportation systems; 
Description: Enables movement of people and assets that are vital to 
our economy, mobility, and security, using aviation, ships, rail, 
pipelines, highways, trucks, buses, and mass transit; 
Lead agency: Department of Homeland Security. 

Source: GAO analysis of The National Infrastructure Protection Plan, 
Homeland Security Presidential Directive 7, and the National Strategy 
for Homeland Security. 

[A] The Department of Agriculture is responsible for food (meat, 
poultry, and eggs) and agriculture; and the Department of Health and 
Human Services, Food and Drug Administration, is responsible for food 
other than meat, poultry, and egg products. 

[End of table] 

DHS Organization Is the Focal Point for National Cybersecurity Efforts
----------------------------------------------------------------------

In June 2003, DHS created the National Cyber Security Division (NCSD), 
to serve as a national focal point for addressing cybersecurity issues 
and to coordinate the implementation of the National Strategy to Secure 
Cyberspace (the Cyberspace Strategy). Its mission is to secure 
cyberspace and America's cyber assets in cooperation with public, 
private, and international entities. NCSD reports to the Assistant 
Secretary for Cybersecurity and Communications. 

A key component of NCSD, the U.S. Computer Emergency Readiness Team (US-
CERT), is an operational organization responsible for analyzing and 
addressing cyber threats and vulnerabilities and disseminating cyber 
threat warning information. In the event of an Internet disruption, US- 
CERT facilitates coordination of recovery activities with the network 
and security operations centers of owners and operators of the Internet 
and with government incident response teams. We recently reported on US-
CERT's challenges in establishing a comprehensive national cyber 
analysis and warning capability.[Footnote 5] 

NCSD also co-chairs the National Cyber Response Coordination Group 
(NCRCG), which includes officials from the agencies that have a 
responsibility for cybersecurity as well as the lead agencies for 
different critical infrastructure sectors.[Footnote 6] This group is 
the principal federal interagency mechanism for coordinating the 
response to and recovery from significant national cyber incidents. In 
the event of a major incident, NCRCG is responsible for providing 
subject matter expertise, recommendations, and strategic policy support 
to the Secretary of Homeland Security. 

In addition, DHS recently announced that it is establishing a new 
National Cyber Security Center that is to report directly to the 
Secretary of Homeland Security. According to the Assistant Secretary 
for Cybersecurity and Communications, this center will be responsible 
for ensuring coordination among the cyber-related efforts across the 
federal government and improving situational awareness and information 
sharing to support the entities defending government networks, 
including US-CERT. 

DHS Is Responsible for Conducting and Coordinating Cyber Exercises to Improve National Preparedness, Response, and Recovery Capabilities
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Federal policies call for DHS to establish a national exercise program 
to improve the nation's ability to prevent, prepare for, respond to, 
and recover from terrorist attacks, major disasters, and other 
emergencies.[Footnote 7] More specifically, the Cyberspace Strategy 
calls for DHS to conduct cybersecurity exercises to evaluate the impact 
of cyber attacks on governmentwide processes and to explore the use of 
such exercises to test coordination of public and private incident 
management, response, and recovery capabilities. Further, in its 
National Infrastructure Protection Plan, DHS states that it will 
conduct national cyber exercises to improve cyber preparedness, 
response, coordination, and recovery capabilities. [Footnote 8] 

To address its cyber exercise responsibilities, DHS works with other 
federal agencies, state and city governments, regional coalitions, and 
international partners. DHS's role can range from providing cyber 
scenarios or expertise to local or regional exercises, cosponsoring 
exercises, or conducting its own large-scale cyber attack simulations 
(called Cyber Storm exercises). See table 2 for examples of recent and 
planned cyber exercises. 

Table 2: Recent and Planned Cyber Exercises: 

Date: September 2004; 
Exercise name: Blue Cascades II; 
Description: Cosponsored by DHS and organized by members of the Pacific 
Northwest Economic Region. This exercise tested regional capabilities 
to deal with threats, interdependencies, and cascading impacts by 
simulating a series of attacks that disrupted infrastructures and 
organizations, including critical telecommunications and electricity 
assets; 
Participant(s): Federal, state, and local governments and private 
industry. 

Date: October 2004; 
Exercise name: Purple Crescent II; 
Description: Sponsored by the Gulf Coast Regional Partnership for 
Infrastructure Security and funded by DHS. The exercise was designed to 
raise awareness of infrastructure interdependencies and identify how to 
improve regional preparedness by simulating cyber attacks on regional 
infrastructures as well as government and private organizations during 
an approaching hurricane; 
Participant(s): Federal, state, and local governments; academic 
institutions; and private industry. 

Date: April 2005; 
Exercise name: Top Officials-3; 
Description: Sponsored by DHS, this exercise was to evaluate decision 
making by federal, state, and local governments by simulating terrorist 
threats and attacks involving chemicals, biological agents, and 
explosives; 
Participant(s): Federal, state, local, and foreign governments and 
private industry. 

Date: April 2005; 
Exercise name: Multi-State Information Sharing and Analysis Center's 
Tabletop Exercise; 
Description: Cosponsored by DHS and the Multi-State Information Sharing 
and Analysis Center during the center's annual meeting. This tabletop 
exercise was designed to offer an opportunity for the state information 
technology participants to discuss their state policies and procedures 
and to prepare for the Cyber Storm I exercise; 
Participant(s): State governments. 

Date: February 2006; 
Exercise name: Cyber Storm I; 
Description: Sponsored by DHS, Cyber Storm I was the first large-scale 
national cyber exercise to improve incident response and coordination 
capabilities by simulating multiple cyber incidents affecting the 
energy, information technology, telecommunications, and transportation 
critical infrastructure sectors; 
Participant(s): Federal, state, and foreign governments and private 
industry. 

Date: March 2006; 
Exercise name: Blue Cascades III; 
Description: Cosponsored by DHS and organized by members of the Pacific 
Northwest Economic Region. This exercise was designed to focus on 
efforts to recover and restore services by simulating the impact of a 
major earthquake in the area; 
Participant(s): Federal, state, local, and foreign governments and 
private industry. 

Date: October 2006; 
Exercise name: Delaware Cyber Security Tabletop Exercise; 
Description: Sponsored by the state of Delaware, with assistance from 
DHS. This exercise was designed to discuss the technical implications 
of a pandemic disaster scenario; 
Participant(s): State government. 

Date: December 2006; 
Exercise name: Cyber Tempest; 
Description: Cosponsored by DHS and the New York State Office of Cyber 
Security and Critical Infrastructure Coordination. This exercise was 
designed to focus on regional stakeholders' procedures for response and 
coordination during emergencies; 
Participant(s): State governments. 

Date: April 2007; 
Exercise name: Multi-State Information Sharing and Analysis Center's 
Tabletop Exercise; 
Description: Cosponsored by DHS and the Multi-State Information Sharing 
and Analysis Center during the center's annual meeting. This exercise 
was designed to offer an opportunity for the state information 
technology participants to discuss their state policies and procedures 
and to prepare for the Cyber Storm II exercise; 
Participant(s): State governments. 

Date: September 2007; 
Exercise name: ChicagoFIRST Exercise; 
Description: Cosponsored by DHS and ChicagoFIRST, a nonprofit 
organization representing financial institutions. This exercise was 
designed to offer the city government an opportunity to collaborate 
with greater Chicago regional stakeholders; 
Participant(s): Local/regional government. 

Date: October 2007; 
Exercise name: Top Officials-4; 
Description: Sponsored by DHS. This exercise was designed to test 
federal, state, territorial, and local response capabilities by 
simulating coordinated attacks using a radiological dispersal device; 
Participant(s): Federal, state, local, and foreign governments and 
private industry. 

Date: October 2007; 
Exercise name: Illinois Cyber Tabletop Exercise; 
Description: Sponsored by the state of Illinois, with assistance from 
DHS. This exercise was designed to provide participants with an 
opportunity to discuss a cyber scenario affecting multiple state 
critical infrastructures, resulting in cascading effects across the 
state; 
Participant(s): State government. 

Date: October 2007; 
Exercise name: Delaware Cyber Security Tabletop Exercise; 
Description: Sponsored by the state of Delaware, with assistance from 
DHS. The exercise was designed to discuss the increasing threat of 
financial and identify thefts with stakeholders; 
Participant(s): State government. 

Date: March 2008; 
Exercise name: Cyber Storm II; 
Description: Sponsored by DHS, this exercise was to improve national 
incident response and coordination capabilities by simulating physical 
and cyber attacks against the transportation, information technology, 
and chemical critical infrastructure sectors; 
Participant(s): Federal, state, and foreign governments and private 
industry. 

Date: May 2008; 
Exercise name: Massachusetts Cyber Exercise; 
Description: Cosponsored by DHS and the state of Massachusetts. This 
exercise was to examine processes, procedures, and the operational 
architecture of system operators, law enforcement officials, local/ 
state government, and several private sector partners in response to 
specific cyber attack scenarios; 
Participant(s): State and local governments. 

Date: September 2008; 
Exercise name: ChicagoFIRST Exercise; 
Description: Cosponsored by DHS and ChicagoFIRST. This exercise is 
planned to focus on the financial sector; 
Participant(s): Private industry. 

Source: GAO analysis of DHS data. 

[End of table] 

DHS's Cyber Storm Exercises
---------------------------

DHS's Cyber Storm exercises are intended to examine national 
preparedness, response, coordination, and recovery efforts when faced 
with a large-scale cyber incident. Participants include federal and 
state agencies, private industry representatives, and selected foreign 
governments. DHS conducted Cyber Storm exercises in 2006 and 2008, and 
is planning to conduct a third exercise in 2010. 

In February 2006, DHS conducted Cyber Storm I at a cost of about $3.7 
million. The exercise simulated a large-scale attack affecting the 
energy and transportation infrastructures, using the telecommunications 
infrastructure as a medium for the attack. Participants included eight 
federal departments and three agencies, three states, and four foreign 
countries. The exercise also involved representatives from the private 
sector--including 11 information technology companies, 7 electric 
companies, 1 banking and finance company, and 2 airlines--and over 100 
public and private agencies, associations, and corporations. DHS 
officials conducted the exercise primarily on a separate network to 
minimize the impact on "real world" information systems. The objectives 
of Cyber Storm I were to: 

* exercise interagency coordination by convening NCRCG and the 
Interagency Incident Management Group, a multi-agency team of federal 
executives responsible for providing strategic advice during nationally 
significant incidents;[Footnote 9] 

* exercise intergovernmental and intragovernmental coordination and 
incident response; 

* identify policies and issues that hinder or support cybersecurity 
requirements; 

* identify public/private interface communications and thresholds of 
coordination to improve cyber incident response and recovery, as well 
as identify critical information sharing paths and mechanisms; 

* identify, improve, and promote public and private sector interaction 
in processes and procedures for communicating appropriate information 
to key stakeholders and the public; 

* identify cyber and physical infrastructure interdependencies with 
real world economic and political impact; 

* raise awareness of the economic and national security impacts 
associated with a significant cyber incident; and: 

* highlight available tools and technologies with analytical cyber 
incident response and recovery capabilities. 

In March 2008, DHS conducted its second broad-scale exercise, called 
Cyber Storm II. The exercise cost about $6.4 million, and simulated a 
large-scale cyber attack affecting the communications, information 
technology, chemical, and transportation infrastructures. According to 
DHS, the exercise involved 18 federal agencies, 9 states, 10 
information sharing and analysis centers, 5 foreign countries, and over 40 industry representatives from the private sector. The objectives of Cyber Storm II were to
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

* examine the capabilities of participating organizations to prepare 
for, protect from, and respond to the effects of cyber attacks; 

* exercise senior leadership decision making and interagency 
coordination of incident responses in accordance with national-level 
policies and procedures; 

* validate information sharing relationships and communication paths 
for the collection and dissemination of cyber incident situational 
awareness, response, and recovery information; and: 

* examine the means and processes to share sensitive and classified 
information across standard boundaries in safe and secure ways without 
compromising proprietary or national security interests. 

DHS plans to issue a report on what it learned from Cyber Storm II by 
the end of 2008. 

DHS Identified Eight Lessons during Cyber Storm I
-------------------------------------------------

While Cyber Storm I participants reported that the exercise was 
valuable in that it helped them establish and improve interagency and 
public/private response relationships, DHS also identified eight 
lessons during the Cyber Storm I exercise that affected all 
participating sectors and agencies. These lessons involved improving 
(1) the interagency coordination groups; (2) contingency planning, risk 
assessment, and roles and responsibilities; (3) integration of 
incidents across infrastructures; (4) access to information; (5) 
coordination of response activities; (6) strategic communications and 
public relations; (7) processes, tools, and technology; and (8) the 
exercise program. 

Interagency Coordination Groups
-------------------------------

DHS reported that during the exercise, the two key interagency 
coordination groups--NCRCG and the Interagency Incident Management 
Group--were convened appropriately and that they worked well together. 
For example, the two groups coordinated to develop a refined awareness 
of the attack situation and to assess effects on the nation's critical 
infrastructure. However, the agency found that a broader understanding 
of how these groups operate would improve coordination, both within the 
government and with the private sector. Specifically, participants 
reported that: 

* greater collaboration could be achieved if the private sector was 
allowed interaction with NCRCG during major incidents, 

* additional work was needed to determine how to effectively elevate 
the alert levels in response to cyber attacks or threats, 

* NCRCG did not have enough technical experts on staff to fully 
leverage the large volume of incident information, 

* communication procedures were needed to deliver key technical 
messages at a layman's level to organizations' public affairs groups in 
a timely manner, and: 

* an established information sharing process between NCRCG and allied 
nations would facilitate communication and help ensure a more effective 
response. 

Contingency Planning, Risk Assessment, and Roles and Responsibilities
---------------------------------------------------------------------

DHS found that formal contingency planning, risk assessment, and the 
definition of roles and responsibilities across the entire cyber 
community must continue to be solidified. It reported that in cases 
where procedures were clear and fully understood by participants, 
incident responses were timely and well coordinated. However, in cases 
where there were no previously established relationships and procedures 
for coordinating responses and assessing risks were not clear, 
participants had difficulty determining which organizations and people 
to contact. In addition, DHS found that contingency planning for backup 
or resilient communications was critical. The agency noted that during 
the exercise many participants relied heavily on communications systems 
that could be vulnerable to attack or failure. 

Integration of Incidents across Infrastructures
-----------------------------------------------

According to DHS, the integration of multiple incidents across multiple 
infrastructures and between the public and private sectors remained a 
challenge. DHS reported that the cyber incident response community was 
generally effective in addressing single threats or attacks and, to 
some extent, in addressing multiple threats and attacks when these 
incidents were treated as individual and discrete events. However, 
participants were challenged when attempting to develop an integrated 
situational awareness and to understand the impact of multiple attacks 
across sectors. As the organization responsible for analyzing cyber 
threats and disseminating warnings, US-CERT had a lead role in forming 
an integrated situational awareness. However, during the exercise, US- 
CERT was inundated with information and questions from both the public 
and the private sectors. The US-CERT team found that the volume of 
information limited its ability to simultaneously provide situational 
awareness coordination and conduct technical analyses. Participants 
reported that a prioritization scheme is needed in order to rapidly 
assess cyber incidents, their sources, and their applicability to the 
broad-scale attack. In addition, DHS noted that there needs to be 
greater clarification of US-CERT's roles, responsibilities, and 
procedures. 

Access to Information
---------------------

While DHS reported that a continuous flow of information created a 
common framework for responding to the incidents, the majority of 
exercise participants reported difficulty in identifying accurate and 
up-to-date sources of information. For example, during the exercise, 
participants received multiple alerts on a single issue, which created 
confusion and made it more difficult to establish a single coordinated 
response. Participants observed that establishing a single point of 
contact for information would allow a common framework for responses, 
and noted that US-CERT is the correct agency to disseminate time 
sensitive and critical information to the appropriate organizations. In 
addition, while US-CERT provided significant information in the form of 
alerts and technical bulletins, participants stated that US-CERT's 
capabilities to post information in a timely, secure, and accurate 
manner needed to be further explored. 

Coordination of Response Activities
-----------------------------------

DHS found that coordinating responses became more challenging as the 
number of cyber events increased, thus highlighting the importance of 
cooperation and communication. For example, during the exercise, 
participants noted the overwhelming effects that multiple, 
simultaneous, and coordinated attacks had on their response activities, 
which proved that the ability to accurately fuse information is crucial 
for responding appropriately to simultaneous attacks. Participants 
reported that clarifying roles and responsibilities across government, 
as well as the expectations between public and private sectors, is 
needed to coordinate preventive measures and responses to disruptions. 

Strategic Communications and Public Relations
---------------------------------------------

DHS reported that public messaging must be an integral part of plans 
for responding to a cyber incident in order to provide critical 
information to the response community and to empower the public to take 
appropriate actions. Exercise participants stated that publicly 
released information could undermine consumer confidence, and noted the 
importance of aligning both public and private sector public relations 
plans in order to have a coordinated approach during a crisis. In 
addition, DHS found that federal responses to cyber incidents must 
include public affairs teams to ensure that press releases and accurate 
situation updates are provided to partner organizations and media 
outlets. 

Processes, Tools, and Technology
--------------------------------

DHS reported that improved processes, tools, and training for analyzing 
and prioritizing the physical, economic, and national security impacts 
of cyber attack scenarios would enhance the quality, speed, and 
coordination of response. In particular, participants reported that 
exchanging and sharing classified information was a challenge and 
suggested that processes be developed to downgrade classified 
information so that it could be shared throughout the response 
community. 

The Exercise Program
--------------------

DHS reported that recurring exercises would strengthen participants' 
awareness of organizational cyber incident response, roles, policies, 
and procedures. Participants observed that ongoing training, 
discussions, and exercises are needed to build relationships among 
organizations and to strengthen the coordination of responses to cyber 
incidents. In addition, several participants in Cyber Storm I 
recommended the execution of smaller, more routine exercises. 

DHS Has Demonstrated Progress in Addressing Lessons from Its First Cyber Storm Exercise, but More Remains to Be Done
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

While DHS has demonstrated progress in addressing the lessons it 
learned from its first Cyber Storm exercise, more remains to be done to 
fully address the lessons. Federal policy requires that DHS develop and 
maintain a system to collect, analyze, and disseminate lessons learned, 
best practices, and information from exercises, training events, and 
other sources.[Footnote 10] In addition, DHS's homeland security 
exercise program guidance requires that, following an exercise, 
planners must identify a list of corrective actions and track their 
implementation.[Footnote 11] 

DHS has begun to fulfill these requirements. Specifically, DHS 
documented the lessons it learned during the first Cyber Storm exercise 
and identified 66 activities that address one or more of the lessons. 
These activities included hosting meetings with key cyber response 
officials from foreign, federal, and state governments and private 
industry; refining the procedures under which these entities operate; 
and participating in smaller cyber exercises to test these refined 
procedures (see app. II for a list of activities). 

In addition, DHS has made progress in completing its planned 
activities, but more remains to be done. Of the 66 activities intended 
to address the lessons, 42 activities have been completed. These 
completed activities range from clarified procedures to improved 
technology for emergency responders, and they should improve 
communications and response activities during a significant cyber 
incident. DHS reported that another activity had been completed, but 
was unable to provide evidence demonstrating its completion. However, 
key activities needed to improve coordination and response during a 
significant cyber incident have not yet been completed. The remaining 
23 activities include 16 activities that are ongoing and 7 activities 
that are planned for the future. While DHS has identified completion 
dates for its planned activities, it has not identified completion 
dates associated with activities that are reported as ongoing. For 
example, DHS reported that it has work under way to issue guidance to 
information sharing and analysis centers on public communications 
related to cybersecurity, but has not identified a milestone for 
completing this activity. Table 3 provides the number of activities in 
each of these categories. 

Table 3: Summary of Status of Activities: 

Status of DHS activities: Reported and validated as completed; 
Number of activities: 42. 

Status of DHS activities: Reported as completed, but not validated due 
to insufficient evidence; 
Number of activities: 1. 

Status of DHS activities: Reported as ongoing; 
Number of activities: 16. 

Status of DHS activities: Reported as planned for the future; 
Number of activities: 7. 

Status of DHS activities: Total; 
Number of activities: 66. 

Source: GAO analysis of DHS data. 

[End of table] 

Focusing on each of the eight lessons, DHS has completed selected 
activities within each lesson, but has more to do. The department's 
progress on each of the lessons learned during the first Cyber Storm 
exercise is discussed below. In reviewing this progress, it is 
important to note that because many of DHS's activities are intended to 
address more than one lesson, the sum of the activities supporting all 
eight lessons is higher than the net number of activities. 
Specifically, DHS listed 121 activities to address lessons 1 through 8, 
but 55 of these repeat a prior activity. A complete list of the 
activities supporting each lesson and their status are provided in 
appendix III. 

* Interagency coordination groups--DHS identified 32 activities to 
address the need for improving the interagency coordination groups. Of 
these, 24 activities have been completed and 8 are ongoing or planned 
for the future. DHS completed activities such as researching and 
procuring situation awareness visualization and communication tools and 
conducting a tabletop exercise among NCRCG, the Homeland Security 
Operations Center, the Crisis Action Team, and US-CERT. Activities that 
still remain to be completed include establishing secure communications 
with all international partners and working with leadership to frame 
possible changes in rules for raising alert levels. 

* Contingency planning, risk assessment, and roles and 
responsibilities--DHS identified 15 activities to address the need for 
improved contingency planning, risk assessment, and roles and 
responsibilities. Of these, 8 activities had been completed and 7 are 
ongoing or planned for the future. DHS completed activities such as 
researching secure cell phone capability for NCRCG members and 
procuring satellite phones. Activities that still remain to be 
completed include coordinating standard operating procedures and 
concepts of operations with several information sharing and analysis 
centers and establishing a continuity-of-operations plan. 

* Integration of incidents across infrastructures--DHS identified 16 
activities to address the need for improved integration of incidents 
across infrastructures. Of these, 9 have been completed and 7 are 
ongoing or planned for the future. Completed activities include meeting 
with international participants to share capabilities and establish 
working relationships and researching alternatives to the Emergency 
Notification System. Activities that still remain to be completed 
include filling open spots at US-CERT to better address its mission and 
coordinating standard operating procedures with US-CERT and the 
information technology and communications information sharing and 
analysis centers. 

* Access to information--DHS identified 15 activities to address the 
need for improved access to information. Of these, 8 activities have 
been completed and 7 are ongoing or planned for the future. DHS 
completed developing a contact list of key public and private sector 
subject matter experts and meeting with international participants to 
share capabilities and establish working relationships. Activities that 
still remain to be completed include identifying and organizing a 
private sector counterpart for NCRCG and establishing processes, 
procedures, and physical means to communicate securely with 
counterparts. 

* Coordination of response activities--DHS identified 15 activities to 
address the need for improved coordination of response activities. Of 
these, 11 have been completed and 4 are ongoing or planned for the 
future. DHS completed activities such as significantly revising the 
NCRCG's standard operating procedures and refining situation report 
development and communication within those procedures. Activities that 
still remain to be completed include developing policies for handling 
classified information and educating the law enforcement community on 
the role and function of NCRCG. 

* Strategic communications and public relations plan--DHS identified 5 
activities to address the lesson that public messaging must be an 
integral part of contingency planning and incident response. Of these, 
1 activity has been completed and 4 are ongoing or planned for the 
future. DHS completed efforts to establish a mechanism for 
communicating real world implications of cyber incidents to DHS Public 
Affairs and the Public Affairs Working Group. Activities that still 
remain to be completed include issuing guidance to information sharing 
and analysis centers on a set of policies for cybersecurity-related 
public communications and developing public affairs messaging 
coordination between public and private information technology 
organizations for normal and emergency operations. 

* Processes, tools, and technology--DHS identified 12 activities to 
address the need for improved processes, tools, and technology. Of 
these, 8 activities have been completed and 4 are ongoing or planned 
for the future. Completed activities include developing a comprehensive 
set of cyber scenarios to support the exercises and clarifying 
interfaces and expectations at every level of NCRCG engagement. 
Activities that still remain to be completed include requesting that 
all federal computer emergency response teams obtain secure 
communications and developing policies for handling classified 
information. 

* Exercise program--DHS identified 11 activities to address the need 
for improvements to the exercise program. Of these, 9 activities have 
been completed and 2 are ongoing or planned for the future. Completed 
activities include participating in a tabletop exercise and a full- 
scale exercise, and improving the communications infrastructure for the 
exercise. DHS has not yet completed activities including implementing a 
relational database consistent with industry standards in order to 
allow better correlation, analysis, and communication of incidents. 

Until DHS schedules and completes its planned corrective activities, 
the agency risks wasting resources on subsequent exercises that repeat 
the lessons it learned in its first exercise. 

Cyber Storm II Participants Observed Progress and Continued Challenges 
in Exercising the National Cyber Response Capability: 

Commenting on their experiences during Cyber Storm II, participants 
observed both progress and continued challenges in building a 
comprehensive national cyber response capability. Their observations 
addressed several key areas, including the value and scope of the 
exercise, roles and responsibilities, public relations, communications, 
the exercise infrastructure, and the handling of classified 
information. 

Exercise value and scope--The participants we met with reported that 
their organization found value in participating in the exercise. For 
example, one agency official stated that the exercises were invaluable 
because they allowed the agency to update call lists and to practice 
how it would respond to cyber events. In addition, a participant stated 
that the exercise had a positive outcome for his organization and that 
the real benefit of the exercise was in sharing information. 

However, participants agreed that smaller, more frequent exercises 
would be helpful in planning for cyber incidents. One agency official 
stated that the "doomsday" scenarios made it difficult to test 
agencies' responses to less dramatic cyber incidents. Another agency 
official reported that the sheer number of e-mail alerts received 
during the exercise was difficult to handle. Another participant 
suggested that DHS conduct exercises focusing on different 
infrastructure sectors during every quarterly meeting of NCRCG. 

Roles and responsibilities--Cyber Storm II participants reported having 
a much better understanding of the various organizations' roles and 
whom to contact within those organizations during a cyber incident. For 
example, a participant noted that NCRCG has had time to stabilize over 
the 2 years since the first Cyber Storm exercise. 

However, participants also reported that there is room for improvement 
in defining the roles and responsibilities of both NCRCG and the law 
enforcement community. Specifically, selected Information Sharing and 
Analysis Center (ISAC) members reported that there is still confusion 
in the private sector on NCRCG's role during a cyber incident. ISAC 
officials stated that it was unclear to the private sector what NCRCG 
is responsible for, what it means when the group is activated, and what 
this activation means to the private sector. In addition, Cyber Storm 
II participants reported the need for further clarification of the 
roles and responsibilities of the law enforcement community during a 
cyber incident. Specifically, law enforcement participants noted that 
other exercise participants may not have been properly reporting 
incidents to the law enforcement community, even though most scenarios 
involved criminal violations. They stated that not being appropriately 
involved in the exercise scenarios made it difficult to fully test 
investigative and legal processes. 

Public relations--While participants generally agreed that media 
relations went well during the exercise, they also identified the need 
for further improvements. To address prior concerns, DHS included a 
public relations specialist in the NCRCG membership to help develop 
messages for NCRCG and other organizations involved in the exercise, 
and provided a technical specialist to the department's public affairs 
office to ensure cyber issues were described accurately. However, a 
private sector participant commented that there appeared to be minimal 
alignment of communications and public relations plans between the 
public and private sectors during the exercise. 

Communications--Participants also reported a need for further 
improvement in communication between participants during the exercise. 
For example, a private sector participant cited a breakdown in 
communication where participants were not aware that the US-CERT alert 
level had been raised. Another participant reported that US-CERT did 
not resolve conflicting data before issuing information--even after 
this individual's ISAC contacted US-CERT. In another instance, a 
private sector participant reported not knowing how to contact US-CERT 
during the exercise. Another participant reported that there were 
instances where private sector players were sharing information with 
DHS, but the information appeared never to have made it to the decision 
makers. 

Exercise infrastructure--Participants generally agreed that 
improvements to the exercise's infrastructure could be made. For 
example, several participants reported that DHS was not able to use an 
encrypted communications system it developed for the exercise because 
the technology failed. However, DHS reported that the technology did 
not fail, but rather that it turned off the technology because of 
security concerns. Participants also reported issues with receiving e- 
mails of the exercises, downloading the exercise directory, and 
accessing the exercise's Web page. Another participant stated that his 
organization did not have time to run some of the exercise scenarios 
due to technical issues it encountered during the exercise. 

Classified information handling--Participants stated that there is a 
continuing challenge in accessing sensitive information on cyber 
threats and incidents, and that policies dealing with classified 
information need to be improved. For example, one private sector 
participant stated that it is not clear how information gets classified 
or what information is available to the private sector. An agency 
official stated that it has been a challenge to pull unclassified 
information out of classified information systems in order to share it. 
Other participants stated that they would like to see additional effort 
expended on sharing unclassified information on the government's public 
response portal--the Government Forum of Incident Response and Security 
Teams portal--which is available to federal agencies and to a limited 
number of local agencies and organizations. Participants noted that the 
portal is too open for truly secure communication but not open enough 
to share information between public and private sectors. 

Many of the challenges that participants noted during Cyber Storm II 
were similar to challenges identified during the first Cyber Storm 
exercise. For example, comments regarding the need for better 
understanding of roles and responsibilities after Cyber Storm II were 
similar to comments made in four of the eight lessons resulting from 
Cyber Storm I. Also, both exercises resulted in comments calling for 
improvements to the exercise program and for better internal and 
external communications. 

Conclusions
-----------

Both public and private sector participants in DHS's Cyber Storm 
exercises agreed that the exercises are valuable in helping them 
coordinate their responses to significant cyber incidents. After the 
completion of the first Cyber Storm exercise in February 2006, DHS 
identified 8 lessons and 66 activities to address these lessons, 
ranging from revising operating procedures to holding tabletop 
exercises to test and evaluate those revised procedures. While DHS has 
made progress in completing over 60 percent of these activities, it has 
more to do to complete key activities--including those that are planned 
for the future as well as those identified as ongoing without a 
completion date. More recently, key federal, state, and private sector 
officials who participated in the second Cyber Storm exercise in March 
2008 observed areas of progress as well as continued challenges--many 
similar to challenges identified during the first exercise. Until DHS 
schedules and completes its corrective activities, the agency risks 
wasting resources on subsequent exercises that repeat the lessons it 
learned in 2006. 

Recommendation for Executive Action
-----------------------------------

Given the importance of continuously improving cyber exercises, we are 
making one recommendation to the Secretary of Homeland Security to 
direct the Assistant Secretary for Cybersecurity and Communications to 
ensure the scheduling and completion of the corrective actions 
addressing lessons learned during Cyber Storm I before conducting the 
next Cyber Storm Exercise. 

Agency Comments and Our Evaluation
----------------------------------

We received written comments on a draft of this report from DHS (see 
app. IV). In the department's response, the Director of the 
Departmental GAO/Office of Inspector General Liaison Office concurred 
with our recommendation and stated that DHS will continue to address 
actions related to Cyber Storm I findings. DHS also reported that after 
receiving the draft report, it has completed additional items, raising 
the percentage of corrective actions completed to over 70 percent. We 
did not modify the status of the activities identified in our report 
because DHS has not yet provided sufficient evidence to demonstrate 
that these activities have been completed. 

In its comments, DHS also stated that end dates are not applicable for 
many of the remaining corrective actions because they are either 
dependent upon outside stakeholder actions or are ongoing or long-term 
activities that are being addressed incrementally over time. However, 
we found that most of the remaining activities are finite in nature and 
could be associated with a time frame. For example, it would be 
possible to establish time frames for issuing guidance to the 
information sharing and analysis centers on public communications, 
requesting that all computer emergency response teams have secure 
communications, and identifying international counterparts to NCRCG. 
Further, while we agree that some activities may involve other 
stakeholders or take more time, it is important for DHS to identify 
interim and final milestones for these activities so that they can 
monitor their progress. This approach is consistent with DHS's guidance 
for its exercise programs, which requires that each corrective action 
have a time frame for implementation. 

DHS officials also provided technical comments, which we have 
incorporated as appropriate. 

As agreed with your offices, unless you publicly announce the contents 
of the report earlier, we plan no further distribution until 30 days 
from the report date. At that time, we will send copies of this report 
to interested congressional committees, the Secretary of Homeland 
Security, the Director of the Office of Management and Budget, and 
other interested parties. In addition, this report will be available at 
no charge on GAO's Web site at [hyperlink, http://www.gao.gov]. 

If you have any questions on matters discussed in this report, please 
contact me at (202) 512-9286 or pownerd@gao.gov. Contact points for our 
Offices of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found on 
the last page of this report. GAO staff who made key contributions to 
this report are listed in appendix V. 

Signed by
---------

David A. Powner --------------- Director, Information Technology Management Issues
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

[End of section] 

Appendix I: Objectives, Scope, and Methodology: 

Our objectives were to (1) identify the lessons that the Department of 
Homeland Security (DHS) learned from the first Cyber Storm exercise, 
(2) assess DHS's efforts to implement lessons learned from this 
exercise, and (3) identify key participants' views of their experiences 
during the second Cyber Storm exercise. 

To identify the lessons learned from DHS's cyber attack simulations, we 
reviewed the agency's Cyber Storm Exercise Report. We also interviewed 
agency officials to obtain clarification on this exercise and the 
lessons learned. 

To assess DHS's efforts to address the lessons it learned from its 
exercise, we analyzed DHS's list of planned activities and the status 
of these activities. We analyzed documentation of the activities that 
were reported as completed, including concepts of operations and 
standard operating procedures for relevant organizations as well as 
evidence of additional staff hires and completion of tabletop 
exercises. We also visited the United States Computer Emergency 
Readiness Team (US-CERT) to observe network and technology changes that 
were made to address lessons identified during Cyber Storm I. We 
interviewed DHS officials from the National Cyber Security Division 
(NCSD) and US-CERT to obtain clarification on documentation and plans. 

To identify key participants' views of their experiences during the 
second Cyber Storm exercise, we interviewed Cyber Storm planners, 
observers, and participants from federal agencies, state governments, 
and the private sector. Specifically, we interviewed representatives 
from the Departments of Transportation, Justice, and Energy because 
these organizations were identified by DHS as key participants in the 
Cyber Storm exercises--either as an organization that was subject to 
simulated cyber incidents or as an organization critical to the 
recovery from the incidents. We interviewed the Multi-State Information 
Sharing and Analysis Center (ISAC) because it was able to represent 
multiple state governments that participated in the exercises. We also 
interviewed private sector officials representing the Information 
Technology ISAC, the Electricity ISAC, and the chemical sector. We 
asked participants about the issues raised during Cyber Storm I and 
whether these were improved or remained as challenges during Cyber 
Storm II. After discussing both Cyber Storm exercises with these 
participants, we analyzed their observations for commonalities and 
organized them into broad categories. These observations are not 
intended to be generalized to other exercise participants. 

We performed our work at the headquarters of the Departments of 
Homeland Security, Transportation, Energy, and Justice and in 
Washington, D.C. In addition, we attended the Cyber Storm II exercise 
held in Washington, D.C., in March 2008. We performed our work from 
January 2008 to September 2008 in accordance with generally accepted 
government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and 
perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide 
a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit 
objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable 
basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. 

[End of section] 

Appendix II: DHS Activities to Address Lessons from Cyber Storm I: 

DHS identified 66 activities to address lessons identified in Cyber 
Storm I. Almost half of these activities are intended to address 
multiple lessons. Table 4 shows the list of activities and which 
lessons they are intended to address. 

Table 4: DHS's Planned Activities and the Lessons They Address: 

Activity identification number: 1; 
DHS activity: Significantly revise standard operating procedures for 
the National Cyber Response Coordination Group (NCRCG); 
Lesson(s) targeted by this activity[A]: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8. 

Activity identification number: 2; 
DHS activity: Refine definition of Cyber Incident of National 
Significance; 
Lesson(s) targeted by this activity[A]: 1. 

Activity identification number: 3; 
DHS activity: Conduct meeting with member agencies to ensure they 
understand the needed resources to support NCRCG during activation; 
Lesson(s) targeted by this activity[A]: 1. 

Activity identification number: 4; 
DHS activity: Establish in standard operating procedures a means of 
quickly and clearly communicating changes in NCRCG engagement status 
with interfacing organizations; 
Lesson(s) targeted by this activity[A]: 1, 4. 

Activity identification number: 5; 
DHS activity: Within standard operating procedures, refine situation 
reports and situation report development and communication procedures; 
Lesson(s) targeted by this activity[A]: 1, 4, 5, 7, 8. 

Activity identification number: 6; 
DHS activity: Research and procure appropriate situation awareness 
visualization and communication tools; 
Lesson(s) targeted by this activity[A]: 1. 

Activity identification number: 7; 
DHS activity: Request access to classified DHS networks in NCRCG's 
room; 
Lesson(s) targeted by this activity[A]: 1, 4, 5, 7, 8. 

Activity identification number: 8; 
DHS activity: Hold meeting among NCRCG, Homeland Security Operations 
Center, Interagency Advisory Council (now the Crisis Action Team), and 
US-CERT; 
Lesson(s) targeted by this activity[A]: 1. 

Activity identification number: 9; 
DHS activity: Conduct a tabletop exercise among NCRCG, the Homeland 
Security Operations Center, the Interagency Advisory Council (now the 
Crisis Action Team), and US-CERT; 
Lesson(s) targeted by this activity[A]: 1. 

Activity identification number: 10; 
DHS activity: Work with the Office of Public Affairs to ensure NCRCG 
receives situation reports; 
Lesson(s) targeted by this activity[A]: 1. 

Activity identification number: 11; 
DHS activity: Provide a liaison to an interfacing group from NCRCG; 
Lesson(s) targeted by this activity[A]: 1. 

Activity identification number: 12; 
DHS activity: During the meeting in June 2006 with international 
participants, discuss coordination with entities similar to NCRCG; 
Lesson(s) targeted by this activity[A]: 1. 

Activity identification number: 13; 
DHS activity: Clarify interfaces and expectation at every level of 
NCRCG engagement; 
Lesson(s) targeted by this activity[A]: 1, 7. 

Activity identification number: 14; 
DHS activity: Move triage capability into US-CERT main facility; 
Lesson(s) targeted by this activity[A]: 1, 3, 5. 

Activity identification number: 15; 
DHS activity: Create four new positions to ensure staffing and 
continuity in US-CERT through normal and emergency operations; 
Lesson(s) targeted by this activity[A]: 1, 7. 

Activity identification number: 16; 
DHS activity: Refine and prioritize use and purposes of key US-CERT 
communications portals to eliminate redundancy and streamline 
communication with subscribers and counterparts; 
Lesson(s) targeted by this activity[A]: 1, 4. 

Activity identification number: 17; 
DHS activity: Meet in June 2006 with all international participants to 
share capabilities and establish working relationships; 
Lesson(s) targeted by this activity[A]: 1, 2, 3, 4. 

Activity identification number: 18; 
DHS activity: Discuss an initial international participant tabletop 
exercise and additional follow-on exercise activities with 
international participants and policy representatives in order to build 
clear way ahead for Cyber Storm II in 2008; 
Lesson(s) targeted by this activity[A]: 1, 3. 

Activity identification number: 19; 
DHS activity: Coordinate support of DHS's Operations office as noted in 
its revised standard operation procedures; 
Lesson(s) targeted by this activity[A]: 1, 3, 4, 5, 7. 

Activity identification number: 20; 
DHS activity: Once refined standard operating procedures are 
established for NCRCG, US-CERT, National Operations Center, and 
Interagency Advisory Council (now the Crisis Action Team) organize and 
support the tabletop exercise to validate and refine interaction; 
Lesson(s) targeted by this activity[A]: 1. 

Activity identification number: 21; 
DHS activity: Support the development of a contact list of key public 
and private sector subject matter experts; 
Lesson(s) targeted by this activity[A]: 1, 4, 5. 

Activity identification number: 22; 
DHS activity: Once clear engagement thresholds are established, ensure 
that all interfacing organizations are aware of thresholds, levels of 
engagement, and implications of each; 
Lesson(s) targeted by this activity[A]: 1. 

Activity identification number: 23; 
DHS activity: Establish a mechanism for communicating real world 
implications of cyber incidents to DHS Public Affairs and the Public 
Affairs Working Group; 
Lesson(s) targeted by this activity[A]: 1, 6. 

Activity identification number: 24; 
DHS activity: Modify standard operating procedures to reflect any 
changes in Homeland Security Advisory System policy; 
Lesson(s) targeted by this activity[A]: 1, 3. 

Activity identification number: 25; 
DHS activity: Work to identify and contact NCRCG counterpart 
organizations within international partners; 
Lesson(s) targeted by this activity[A]: 1, 2, 4. 

Activity identification number: 26; 
DHS activity: Develop the capability to reach back to the private 
sector; 
Lesson(s) targeted by this activity[A]: Activity identification number: 
1. 

Activity identification number: 27; 
DHS activity: Move to develop public affairs messaging coordination 
among NCRCG, NCSD, the Information Technology Information Sharing and 
Analysis Center, and the Information Technology Sector Coordinating 
Council for both normal and emergency operations; 
Lesson(s) targeted by this activity[A]: 1, 3, 6. 

Activity identification number: 28; 
DHS activity: Engage in conversations with leadership to frame possible 
changes in rules for raising alert levels based on threats to cross-
sector support structure; 
Lesson(s) targeted by this activity[A]: 1, 3. 

Activity identification number: 29; 
DHS activity: Establish processes, procedures, and physical means to 
communicate securely with NCRCG counterparts at a policy level; 
Lesson(s) targeted by this activity[A]: 1, 2, 4. 

Activity identification number: 30; 
DHS activity: Once Situation Awareness Toolset is established, arrange 
for appropriate centers to have it; 
Lesson(s) targeted by this activity[A]: 1, 4. 

Activity identification number: 31; 
DHS activity: In meeting with international participants, address 
coordination of standard operating procedures and concept of 
operations; 
Lesson(s) targeted by this activity[A]: 1. 

Activity identification number: 32; 
DHS activity: Work to establish secure communications with all 
international partners; 
Lesson(s) targeted by this activity[A]: 1. 

Activity identification number: 33; 
DHS activity: Procure Government Emergency Telecommunications Service 
cards for all NCRCG members; 
Lesson(s) targeted by this activity[A]: 2. 

Activity identification number: 34; 
DHS activity: Research secure cell phone capability for NCRCG members; 
Lesson(s) targeted by this activity[A]: 2. 

Activity identification number: 35; 
DHS activity: Work with a foreign computer emergency response team to 
cosponsor another foreign computer emergency response team into an 
intragovernmental incident response forum; 
Lesson(s) targeted by this activity[A]: 2. 

Activity identification number: 36; 
DHS activity: Install Critical Infrastructure Warning Information 
Network terminal in US-CERT; 
Lesson(s) targeted by this activity[A]: 2. 

Activity identification number: 37; 
DHS activity: Add redundant network support to US-CERT; 
Lesson(s) targeted by this activity[A]: 2. 

Activity identification number: 38; 
DHS activity: Procure 15 satellite phones; 
Lesson(s) targeted by this activity[A]: 2. 

Activity identification number: 39; 
DHS activity: Work to identify and organize a private sector 
counterpart for NCRCG with appropriate concepts of operations and 
standard operating procedures; 
Lesson(s) targeted by this activity[A]: 2, 4, 5, 7. 

Activity identification number: 40; 
DHS activity: Address public policy issues for industry incident 
response activities in cooperation with the industry and leadership; 
Lesson(s) targeted by this activity[A]: 2. 

Activity identification number: 41; 
DHS activity: Facilitate the development and implementation of cyber 
risk assessment methodologies across the information technology sector 
and in coordination with other sectors; 
Lesson(s) targeted by this activity[A]: 2. 

Activity identification number: 42; 
DHS activity: Coordinate standard operating procedures and concepts of 
operations with several ISACs; 
Lesson(s) targeted by this activity[A]: 2, 3, 5. 

Activity identification number: 43; 
DHS activity: Submit request for continuity-of-operations space and 
establish continuity-of-operations plan; 
Lesson(s) targeted by this activity[A]: 2. 

Activity identification number: 44; 
DHS activity: Research alternatives to the Emergency Notification 
System; 
Lesson(s) targeted by this activity[A]: 3. 

Activity identification number: 45; 
DHS activity: Add dedicated support staff person to focus on processes 
and procedures; 
Lesson(s) targeted by this activity[A]: 3. 

Activity identification number: 46; 
DHS activity: Establish better e-mail connection during exercise to 
avoid spam filtering of injects; 
Lesson(s) targeted by this activity[A]: 3, 5. 

Activity identification number: 47; 
DHS activity: Execute semiannual tabletop exercise with accompanying 
education workshops focused on high-risk scenarios and cyber risk 
assessment; 
Lesson(s) targeted by this activity[A]: 3, 5, 7, 8. 

Activity identification number: 48; 
DHS activity: Coordinate standard operating procedures with US-CERT and 
the Information Technology and Communication ISACs; 
Lesson(s) targeted by this activity[A]: 3, 4. 

Activity identification number: 49; 
DHS activity: Transfer ticket tracking system over to an industry 
standard relational database tracking system for better correlation, 
analysis, and communication of incidents; 
Lesson(s) targeted by this activity[A]: 3, 8. 

Activity identification number: 50; 
DHS activity: Fill open spots with qualified personnel to gain 
bandwidth necessary to better address all aspects of US-CERT mission; 
Lesson(s) targeted by this activity[A]: 3, 8. 

Activity identification number: 51; 
DHS activity: Continue to expand network of informal and semiformal 
relationships with cyber-related associations and interest groups; 
Lesson(s) targeted by this activity[A]: 4. 

Activity identification number: 52; 
DHS activity: Forward request to require all federal computer emergency 
response teams to have secure communications, up to at least Secret; 
Lesson(s) targeted by this activity[A]: 4, 7. 

Activity identification number: 53; 
DHS activity: Request additional NCRCG support staff to address 
planning, correlation, and communication requirements; 
Lesson(s) targeted by this activity[A]: 5. 

Activity identification number: 54; 
DHS activity: Plan for significant pre-Cyber Storm II intelligence and 
law enforcement buildup exercise segment; 
Lesson(s) targeted by this activity[A]: 5. 

Activity identification number: 55; 
DHS activity: Complete permanent home of US-CERT, allowing classified 
operations to occur on-site; 
Lesson(s) targeted by this activity[A]: 5. 

Activity identification number: 56; 
DHS activity: Work to educate law enforcement on role and function of 
the NCRCG and establish sharing of cyber issues; 
Lesson(s) targeted by this activity[A]: 5, 7. 

Activity identification number: 57; 
DHS activity: Work to expedite tear-line policies (policies for 
organizing official documents so that unclassified information can be 
easily separated from classified information and disseminated); 
Lesson(s) targeted by this activity[A]: 5, 7. 

Activity identification number: 58; 
DHS activity: Advocate inclusion of cyber public affairs in all 
exercises where appropriate; 
Lesson(s) targeted by this activity[A]: 6. 

Activity identification number: 59; 
DHS activity: Issue guidance to ISACs on a set of policies for 
cybersecurity-related public communications; 
Lesson(s) targeted by this activity[A]: 6. 

Activity identification number: 60; 
DHS activity: Establish baseline of public messaging based on cyber 
probable scenarios to include best channels for message delivery; 
Lesson(s) targeted by this activity[A]: 6. 

Activity identification number: 61; 
DHS activity: Develop comprehensive set of cyber scenarios to support 
exercises and planning; 
Lesson(s) targeted by this activity[A]: 7. 

Activity identification number: 62; 
DHS activity: Develop reporting process in coordination with reporting 
entities; 
Lesson(s) targeted by this activity[A]: 8. 

Activity identification number: 63; 
DHS activity: Participate in Internet Disruption Working Group tabletop 
exercise; 
Lesson(s) targeted by this activity[A]: 8. 

Activity identification number: 64; 
DHS activity: Plan and support cyber aspects of Top Officials 4 
exercise; 
Lesson(s) targeted by this activity[A]: 8. 

Activity identification number: 65; 
DHS activity: Plan and execute Cyber Storm II; 
Lesson(s) targeted by this activity[A]: 8. 

Activity identification number: 66; 
DHS activity: Coordinate and develop situation report reporting process 
with National Operations Center and NCRCG; 
Lesson(s) targeted by this activity[A]: 8. 

Source: GAO analysis of DHS data. 

[A] The lessons are: 

Lesson 1: Interagency Coordination Groups: 

Lesson 2: Contingency Planning, Risk Assessment, and Roles and Responsibilities
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Lesson 3: Integration of Incidents across Infrastructures: 

Lesson 4: Access to Information: 

Lesson 5: Coordination of Response Activities: 

Lesson 6: Strategic Communications and Public Relations: 

Lesson 7: Processes, Tools, and Technology: 

Lesson 8: The Exercise Program: 

[End of table] 

[End of section] 

Appendix III: GAO Analysis of DHS Efforts to Address Lessons from Cyber 
Storm I
-------

Figure 1 shows, for each lesson learned during Cyber Storm I, the 
status of the activity as reported by DHS and whether the status could 
be validated by GAO. The activities are identified by number in 
appendix II. 

Figure 1: Activity Status, as of June 2008, by Lesson: 

[See PDF for image] 

This figure is a chart depicting the following data
---------------------------------------------------

Interagency Coordination Groups 

Lesson 1: Interagency Coordination Groups; 
Activity: Completed and validated: 
1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15,16,17,18,19,20,21,22,23,31; 
Activity: Completed but not validated: None; 
Activity: Ongoing: 24,25,26,27,28,29; 
Activity: Planned for the future: 30,32; 
Activity: Not applicable: 33 through 66. 

Lesson 2: Contingency Planning, Risk Assessment, and Roles and 
Responsibilities; 
Activity: Completed and validated: 1, 17, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38; 
Activity: Completed but not validated: None; 
Activity: Ongoing: 25, 29, 39, 40, 41; 
Activity: Planned for the future: 42, 43; 
Activity: Not applicable: 2 through 16; 18 through 24; 26, 27, 28, 30, 
31, 32, 44 through 66. 

Lesson 3: Integration of Incidents across Infrastructures; 
Activity: Completed and validated: 1, 14, 17, 18, 19, 44, 45, 46, 47; 
Activity: Completed but not validated: None; 
Activity: Ongoing: 24, 27, 28; 
Activity: Planned for the future: 42, 48, 49, 50; 
Activity: Not applicable: 2 through 13; 15, 16, 20, 21, 22, 23, 25, 26, 
31 through 41, 43, 51 through 66. 

Lesson 4: Access to Information; 
Activity: Completed and validated: 1, 4, 5, 7, 16, 17, 19, 21; 
Activity: Completed but not validated: None; 
Activity: Ongoing: 25, 29, 39, 51, 52; 
Activity: Planned for the future: 30, 48; 
Activity: Not applicable: 2, 3, 6, 8 through 15, 18, 20, 22, 23, 24, 
26, 27, 28, 31 through 38, 40 through 47, 49, 50, 53 through 66. 

Lesson 5: Coordination of Response Activities; 
Activity: Completed and validated: 1, 5, 7, 14, 19, 21, 46, 47, 54, 55; 
Activity: Completed but not validated: 54; 
Activity: Ongoing: 39, 56, 57; 
Activity: Planned for the future: 42; 
Activity: Not applicable: 2, 3, 4, 6, 8 through 13, 15, 16, 17, 18, 20, 
22 through 38, 40, 41, 43, 44, 45, 48, 49, 50, 51, 52, 58 through 66. 

Lesson 6: Strategic Communications and Public Relations Plan; 
Activity: Completed and validated: 23; 
Activity: Completed but not validated: None; 
Activity: Ongoing: 2758, 59, 60; 
Activity: Planned for the future: None; 
Activity: Not applicable: 1 through 22, 24, 25, 26, 28 through 57, 61 
through 66. 

Lesson 7: Processes, Tools, and Technology; 
Activity: Completed and validated: 1, 5, 7, 13, 15, 19, 47, 61; 
Activity: Completed but not validated: None; 
Activity: Ongoing: 39, 52, 56, 57; 
Activity: Planned for the future: None; 
Activity: Not applicable: 2, 3, 4, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 14, 16, 17, 18, 
20 through 38, 40 through 46, 48, 49, 50, 51, 53, 54, 55, 58, 59, 60, 
62 through 66. 

Lesson 8: The Exercise Program; 
Activity: Completed and validated: 1, 5, 7, 47, 62, 63, 64, 65, 66; 
Activity: Completed but not validated: None; 
Activity: Ongoing: None; 
Activity: Planned for the future: 49, 50; 
Activity: Not applicable: 2, 3, 4, 6, 8 through 46, 48, 51 through 61. 

Source: GAO analysis of DHS data. 

[End of figure] 

[End of section] 

Appendix IV: Comments from the Department of Homeland Security: 

U.S. Department of Homeland Security ------------------------------------ Washington, DC 20528
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[hyperlink, http://www.dhs.gov] 

August 22, 2008
---------------

Mr. David Powner
----------------
Director -------- Information Technology Management Issues ---------------------------------------------------------- United States Government Accountability Office
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 441 G Street, N.W. Washington, DC 20548
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Dear Mr. Powner
---------------

Thank you for the opportunity to review and comment on the Government 
Accountability Office's (GAO's) draft report entitled Critical 
Infrastructure Protection: DHS Needs to Fully Address Lessons Learned 
from Its First Cyber Storm Exercise (GAO-08-825). Technical comments 
have been provided under separate cover. 

The Department of Homeland Security's (DHS's) efforts to develop and 
refine procedures for addressing and tracking corrective actions have 
benefited from this GAO engagement. DHS fully agrees with GAO 
assertions that continuous progress and validation of exercise findings 
is essential to improving our Nation's cyber security, preparedness 
posture, and ensuring the best use of resources. 

GAO states in its draft report that DHS addressed and completed 43 of 
the 66 corrective actions. The remaining 23 corrective actions included 
16 items labeled `"ongoing" and 7 items labeled "planned for the 
future." DHS addressed and completed over 66 percent of the total 
corrective actions at the time the GAO's report was drafted. Since the 
release of GAO's draft report, DHS completed additional
items, raising the percentage of corrective actions completed to over 
70 percent. A full breakdown of recent actions undertaken and 
discussion of their status is enclosed as Appendix A. 

Recommendation: Given the importance of continuously improving cyber 
exercises, we are making one recommendation to the Secretary of 
Homeland Security to direct the Assistant Secretary for Cybersecurity 
and Communications to ensure the scheduling and completion of the 
corrective actions addressing lessons learned during Cyber Storm I 
before conducting the next Cyber Storm exercise. 

Response: DHS concurs with the draft GAO report's recommendation and 
will continue to address actions related to Cyber Storm I findings. 
Many of the remaining corrective actions, however, are inherently long-
term or ongoing in nature. Some corrective actions are within DHS's 
direct power to manage or perform, while others require extensive 
coordination with stakeholders. 

Fulfilling the report's recommendation that the Department take action 
to ensure these remaining corrective actions are scheduled and 
completed before executing the next Cyber Storm exercise is dependent 
on various factors. DHS suggests that the remaining corrective actions 
are either: (1) long-term activities and are being incrementally 
addressed over time; (2) dependent upon outside stakeholder action; or 
(3) ongoing, addressed in different capacities over time, and a 
specific "end date" does not apply. 

DHS appreciates the thorough analysis and very constructive points 
raised by the GAO draft report. To best capitalize on this analysis and 
recommendation, DHS plans an enhanced emphasis on how corrective action 
categories are defined for purposes of planning and integration into 
future exercises. DHS is willing to work with GAO as these efforts go 
forward. Finally, we ask that GAO modify the report to reflect the 
additional items the National Cyber Security Division (NCSD) has 
completed since the draft report's release. 

Thank you again for the opportunity to comment on this draft report and 
we look forward to working with you on future homeland security issues. 

Sincerely, 

Signed by
---------

Jerald E. Levine
----------------
Director -------- Departmental GAO/OIG Liaison Office
-----------------------------------------------------

Enclosure
---------

[End of section] 

Appendix V: GAO Contact and Staff Acknowledgments: 

GAO Contact
-----------

David A. Powner, (202) 512-9286, or pownerd@gao.gov. 

Staff Acknowledgments
---------------------

In addition to the contact person named above, Colleen Phillips, 
Assistant Director; Neil Doherty; Nancy Glover; Jim MacAulay; Lee 
McCracken; and Jessica Waselkow made key contributions to this report. 

[End of section] 

Footnotes
---------

[1] The White House, National Strategy to Secure Cyberspace 
(Washington, D.C.: February 2003), and Homeland Security Presidential 
Directive 7: Critical Infrastructure Identification, Prioritization, 
and Protection (Dec. 17, 2003). 

[2] GAO, Critical Infrastructure Protection: Department of Homeland 
Security Faces Challenges in Fulfilling Cybersecurity Responsibilities, 
[hyperlink, http://www.gao.gov/cgi-bin/getrpt?GAO-05-434] (Washington, 
D.C.: May 26, 2005); Critical Infrastructure Protection: Challenges in 
Addressing Cybersecurity, [hyperlink, http://www.gao.gov/cgi-
bin/getrpt?GAO-05-827T] (Washington, D.C.: July 19, 2005); Internet 
Infrastructure: DHS Faces Challenges in Developing a Joint 
Public/Private Recovery Plan, [hyperlink, http://www.gao.gov/cgi-
bin/getrpt?GAO-06-672] (Washington, D.C.: June 16, 2006); Internet 
Infrastructure: Challenges in Developing a Public/Private Recovery 
Plan, [hyperlink, http://www.gao.gov/cgi-bin/getrpt?GAO-06-863T] 
(Washington, D.C.: July 28, 2006); Critical Infrastructure Protection: 
DHS Leadership Needed to Enhance Cybersecurity Elements, [hyperlink, 
http://www.gao.gov/cgi-bin/getrpt?GAO-06-1087T] (Washington, D.C.: 
Sept. 13, 2006); Critical Infrastructure Protection: Multiple Efforts 
to Secure Control Systems Are Under Way, but Challenges Remain, 
[hyperlink, http://www.gao.gov/cgi-bin/getrpt?GAO-07-1036] (Washington, 
D.C.: Sept. 10, 2007); Critical Infrastructure Protection: Multiple 
Efforts to Secure Control Systems Are Under Way, but Challenges Remain, 
[hyperlink, http://www.gao.gov/cgi-bin/getrpt?GAO-08-119T] (Washington, 
D.C.: Oct. 17, 2007); Critical Infrastructure Protection: Sector-
Specific Plans' Coverage of Key Cyber Security Elements Varies, 
[hyperlink, http://www.gao.gov/cgi-bin/getrpt?GAO-08-113] (Washington, 
D.C.: Oct. 31, 2007). 

[3] DHS reported that one other activity had been completed, but the 
department was unable to provide evidence demonstrating its completion. 

[4] The law and policies include the Homeland Security Act of 2002 
(Pub. L. No. 107-296, Nov. 25, 2002); Homeland Security Presidential 
Directive 7: Critical Infrastructure Identification, Prioritization, 
and Protection (Dec. 17, 2003); and The National Strategy to Secure 
Cyberspace (February 2003). 

[5] GAO, Cyber Analysis and Warning: DHS Faces Challenges in 
Establishing a Comprehensive National Capability, [hyperlink, 
http://www.gao.gov/cgi-bin/getrpt?GAO-08-588] (Washington, D.C.: July 
31, 2008). 

[6] The Department of Justice's Computer Crime and Intellectual 
Property Section and the Department of Defense also co-chair this 
group. 

[7] Homeland Security Presidential Directive 8: National Preparedness 
(Dec. 17, 2003) and The National Strategy to Secure Cyberspace 
(February 2003). 

[8] Department of Homeland Security, National Infrastructure Protection 
Plan (Washington, D.C.: June 2006). 

[9] The Interagency Incident Management Group was later reorganized and 
renamed the Crisis Action Team. 

[10] Homeland Security Presidential Directive 8: National Preparedness 
(Dec. 17, 2003). 

[11] Department of Homeland Security, Homeland Security Exercise and 
Evaluation Program (Washington, D.C.: 2007). 

[End of section] 

GAO's Mission
-------------

The Government Accountability Office, the audit, evaluation and 
investigative arm of Congress, exists to support Congress in meeting 
its constitutional responsibilities and to help improve the performance 
and accountability of the federal government for the American people. 
GAO examines the use of public funds; evaluates federal programs and 
policies; and provides analyses, recommendations, and other assistance 
to help Congress make informed oversight, policy, and funding 
decisions. GAO's commitment to good government is reflected in its core 
values of accountability, integrity, and reliability. 

Obtaining Copies of GAO Reports and Testimony
---------------------------------------------

The fastest and easiest way to obtain copies of GAO documents at no 
cost is through GAO's Web site [hyperlink, http://www.gao.gov]. Each 
weekday, GAO posts newly released reports, testimony, and 
correspondence on its Web site. To have GAO e-mail you a list of newly 
posted products every afternoon, go to [hyperlink, http://www.gao.gov] 
and select "E-mail Updates." 

Order by Mail or Phone
----------------------

The first copy of each printed report is free. Additional copies are $2 
each. A check or money order should be made out to the Superintendent 
of Documents. GAO also accepts VISA and Mastercard. Orders for 100 or more copies mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent. Orders should be sent to
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

U.S. Government Accountability Office
------------------------------------- 441 G Street NW, Room LM: Washington, D.C. 20548
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

To order by Phone
-----------------
Voice: (202) 512-6000: 
TDD: (202) 512-2537: 
Fax: (202) 512-6061: 

To Report Fraud, Waste, and Abuse in Federal Programs
-----------------------------------------------------

Contact
-------

Web site: [hyperlink, http://www.gao.gov/fraudnet/fraudnet.htm]: 
E-mail: fraudnet@gao.gov: 
Automated answering system: (800) 424-5454 or (202) 512-7470: 

Congressional Relations
-----------------------

Ralph Dawn, Managing Director, dawnr@gao.gov
-------------------------------------------- (202) 512-4400: U.S. Government Accountability Office
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 441 G Street NW, Room 7125: Washington, D.C. 20548
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Public Affairs
--------------

Chuck Young, Managing Director, youngc1@gao.gov
----------------------------------------------- (202) 512-4800: U.S. Government Accountability Office
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 441 G Street NW, Room 7149: Washington, D.C. 20548
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

GAO's Mission
-------------

The Government Accountability Office, the audit, evaluation and 
investigative arm of Congress, exists to support Congress in meeting 
its constitutional responsibilities and to help improve the performance 
and accountability of the federal government for the American people. 
GAO examines the use of public funds; evaluates federal programs and 
policies; and provides analyses, recommendations, and other assistance 
to help Congress make informed oversight, policy, and funding 
decisions. GAO's commitment to good government is reflected in its core 
values of accountability, integrity, and reliability. 

Obtaining Copies of GAO Reports and Testimony
---------------------------------------------

The fastest and easiest way to obtain copies of GAO documents at no 
cost is through GAO's Web site [hyperlink, http://www.gao.gov]. Each 
weekday, GAO posts newly released reports, testimony, and 
correspondence on its Web site. To have GAO e-mail you a list of newly 
posted products every afternoon, go to [hyperlink, http://www.gao.gov] 
and select "E-mail Updates." 

Order by Mail or Phone
----------------------

The first copy of each printed report is free. Additional copies are $2 
each. A check or money order should be made out to the Superintendent 
of Documents. GAO also accepts VISA and Mastercard. Orders for 100 or more copies mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent. Orders should be sent to
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

U.S. Government Accountability Office
------------------------------------- 441 G Street NW, Room LM: Washington, D.C. 20548
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

To order by Phone
-----------------
Voice: (202) 512-6000: 
TDD: (202) 512-2537: 
Fax: (202) 512-6061: 

To Report Fraud, Waste, and Abuse in Federal Programs
-----------------------------------------------------

Contact
-------

Web site: [hyperlink, http://www.gao.gov/fraudnet/fraudnet.htm]: 
E-mail: fraudnet@gao.gov: 
Automated answering system: (800) 424-5454 or (202) 512-7470: 

Congressional Relations
-----------------------

Ralph Dawn, Managing Director, dawnr@gao.gov
-------------------------------------------- (202) 512-4400: U.S. Government Accountability Office
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 441 G Street NW, Room 7125: Washington, D.C. 20548
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Public Affairs
--------------

Chuck Young, Managing Director, youngc1@gao.gov
----------------------------------------------- (202) 512-4800: U.S. Government Accountability Office
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 441 G Street NW, Room 7149: Washington, D.C. 20548
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

*** End of document. ***
