TITLE: Notice of Award of a Sole Source Cooperative Agreement To Fund Administracion Nacional de Laboratorios e Institutos de Salud Dr. Carlos G. Malbran, Argentina; Instituto de Salud Publica de Chile, Chile; Ministerio de Salud Pública de Ecuador, Ecuador; Fondacioni Instituto Conmemorativo Gorgas de Estudios de la Salud, Panama; Alter Vida Centro De Estudios Y Formación Para Ecodesarrollo, Paraguay; Caribbean Public Health Agency, Caribbean Region
ACTION: Notice.

The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), located within the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), announces six separate awards to fund the Administracion Nacional de Laboratorios e Institutos de Salud Dr. Carlos G. Malbran, Argentina; Instituto de Salud Publica de Chile, Chile; Ministerio de Salud P[uacute]blica de Ecuador, Ecuador; Instituto Conmemorativo Gorgas de Estudios de la Salud, Panama; Alter Vida Centro De Estudios Y Formaci[oacute]n Para Ecodesarrollo, Paraguay; Caribbean Public Health Agency, Caribbean Region. For Administracion Nacional de Laboratorios e Institutos de Salud Dr. Carlos G. Malbran, Argentina, the award is for approximately $600,000 in Federal Fiscal Year (FFY) 2026, subject to the availability of funds. For Instituto de Salud Publica de Chile, Chile, the award is for approximately $600,000 in FFY 2026, subject to the availability of funds. For Ministerio de Salud P[uacute]blica de Ecuador, Ecuador, the award is for approximately $800,000 in FFY 2026, subject to the availability of funds. For Instituto Conmemorativo Gorgas de Estudios de la Salud, Panama, the award is for approximately $600,000 in FFY 2026, subject to the availability of funds. For Alter Vida Centro De Estudios Y Formaci[oacute]n Para Ecodesarrollo, Paraguay, the award is for approximately $600,000 in FFY 2026, subject to the availability of funds. For Caribbean Public Health Agency, Caribbean Region, the award is for approximately $600,000 in FFY 2026, subject to the availability of funds. The approximate total FFY 2026 funding amount for the six recipients is $3,800,000. Funding amounts for years 2-5 for each recipient will be set at continuation. The awards will enhance health security by strengthening global influenza and other priority pathogen surveillance networks to detect and respond to infectious disease threats.
