CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION RECORD
Registry identifier: NCT03752840

IDENTIFICATION
Brief Title: Village-Integrated Eye Worker Trial II
Official Title: Village-Integrated Eye Worker Trial II (VIEW II):A Cluster-randomized Trial of the Effectiveness of Community-based Ocular Disease Screening
Unique Protocol Identification Number: 17-22776-2

DESCRIPTION
Brief Summary: The vast majority of blindness is avoidable. The World Health Organization (WHO) estimates that 80% of cases of visual impairment could be prevented or reversed with early diagnosis and treatment. The leading causes of visual impairment are cataract and refractive error, followed by glaucoma, age-related macular degeneration (AMD), and diabetic retinopathy (DR). Loss of vision from these conditions is not inevitable; however, identifying cases early and linking cases with appropriate care remain significant challenges. To address the global burden of avoidable blindness, eye care systems must determine optimal strategies for identifying people with or predisposed to visual impairment beyond opportunistic screening. Outreach programs can prevent blindness both by screening for asymptomatic disease like age-related macular degeneration (AMD), diabetic retinopathy (DR), and glaucoma and case detection of symptomatic disease like cataract and refractive error. Eye care systems have developed numerous approaches to these identification methods, including screening using telemedicine and case detection via cataract camps or health worker models, but no studies have been conducted on the 
Primary Disease or Condition Being Studied in the Trial: Age-related Macular Degeneration, Diabetic Retinopathy, Glaucoma

STUDY DESIGN
Study Type: INTERVENTIONAL
Study Phase: NA
Primary Purpose: SCREENING
Study Design: RANDOMIZED; PARALLEL; SINGLE
Enrollment: 60200 [Estimated]

INTERVENTIONS
Intervention Name: Visual acuity (presenting and pinhole)
Intervention Type: OTHER
Intervention Description: Presenting and pinhole visual acuity will be assessed using the Peek Acuity mobile application. Participants meeting referral criteria will be referred to the nearest eye care center or eye hospital.
Intervention Name: Optical coherence tomography (OCT)
Intervention Type: OTHER
Intervention Description: OCT will be used to image the anterior segment, the macula, and the retinal nerve fiber layer. The images will be assessed for abnormalities and participants meeting referral criteria will be referred to the local eye hospital.
Intervention Name: Intraocular pressure
Intervention Type: OTHER
Intervention Description: Intraocular pressure will be measured using an iCare tonometer. Participants meeting referral criteria will be referred to the nearest eye care center or eye hospital.
Intervention Name: Active linkage to care
Intervention Type: OTHER
Intervention Description: Referred participants will be followed closely by study staff to ensure completion of follow-up visits.
Intervention Name: Fundus Photography
Intervention Type: OTHER
Intervention Description: Fundus cameras will be used to image the macula and optic nerve. The images will be assessed for abnormalities and participants meeting referral criteria will be referred to the local eye hospital.

OUTCOME MEASURES
Primary Outcome Measure Information: Pinhole visual acuity (logMAR) in people aged 60 years and older [Time Frame: 9 years]
Secondary Outcome Measure Information: Incidence of visual impairment due to AMD, DR, or glaucoma [Time Frame: 9 years]
Secondary Outcome Measure Information: Bilateral blindness in people aged 60 years and older, defined as pinhole visual acuity worse than Snellen 20/400 (Metric Snellen worse than 6/120; logMAR worse than 1.3) in the better-seeing eye [Time Frame: 9 years]
Secondary Outcome Measure Information: Presenting visual acuity (logMAR) in people aged 60 years and older [Time Frame: 9 years]
Secondary Outcome Measure Information: Cost-effectiveness of the screening intervention [Time Frame: 9 years]

ELIGIBILITY AND RECRUITMENT
Eligibility Criteria: Community level Inclusion Criteria: * Located in catchment area of Bharatpur Eye Hospital or Lumbini Eye Institute * Reachable by non-4WD vehicle * Urban or peri-urban Exclusion Criteria: \- Local leaders unwilling to participate Person level Inclusion Criteria: * 60 years and older * Residing in the community during the time of the census Exclusion Criteria: \- Unwilling to participate
Sex/Gender: ALL
Age Limits: 60 Years
Accepts Healthy Volunteers: Yes
Overall Recruitment Status: RECRUITING

DATES
Study Start Date: 2019-04-21
Primary Completion Date: 2029-08-31
Study Completion Date: 2029-08-31
Record Verification Date: 2026-06

REGULATORY
Studies a U.S. FDA-regulated Drug Product: No
Studies a U.S. FDA-regulated Device Product: No
Availability of Expanded Access: No

SPONSOR, RESPONSIBLE PARTY AND SITES
Name of the Sponsor: University of California, San Francisco
Responsible Party: Sponsor
Responsible Party Contact Information: Krisianne M Aromin, BS, (415) 476-1442, krisianne.aromin@ucsf.edu
Facility Information: University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, United States [Individual Site Status: RECRUITING]
