CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION RECORD
Registry identifier: NCT04864886

IDENTIFICATION
Brief Title: Metabolic Profiling of Immune Responses in Immune-mediated Diseases
Official Title: Metabolic Profiling of Immune Responses in Immune-Mediated Diseases
Unique Protocol Identification Number: 10000392
Secondary ID: 000392-I

DESCRIPTION
Brief Summary: Background: The immune system is the part of the body that fights infection. Some people have immune deficiencies that cause skin rashes, make them get sick often with infections, or make it difficult for their skin to heal. Researchers want to learn more to better treat conditions that affect immune response. Objective: To learn about how the immune system and skin healing are related to each other. Eligibility: People ages 18-75 with primary immune deficiency, eczema, or psoriasis. Healthy volunteers are also needed. Design: Participants will be screened with a medical and medicine history and a physical exam. They may take a pregnancy test. Participants will discuss the medicines or supplements they take as well as skin products they use, such as soaps and lotions. Participants will have up to 4 skin biopsies taken from the forearm. A needle will inject an anesthetic into the skin where the biopsy will be done. A sharp tool that looks like a tiny cookie cutter will be used to remove a round plug of skin a bit smaller than the tip of a pencil. Participants will give at least 1 blood sample. Participants may have optional skin swab collection. A cotton swab will be used to swab th
Primary Disease or Condition Being Studied in the Trial: Primary Immunodeficiency, Psoriasis, Atopic Dermatitis, Immune-mediated Diseases

STUDY DESIGN
Study Type: OBSERVATIONAL
Enrollment: 300 [Estimated]


OUTCOME MEASURES
Primary Outcome Measure Information: Change in relative abundance of microbial skin taxa and/or skin metabolites associated with wound healing or immune mediated disorders. [Time Frame: Throughout study]
Primary Outcome Measure Information: Fold difference in metabolic pathways associated with immune pathways. [Time Frame: Throughout study]
Primary Outcome Measure Information: Fold differences in metabolic pathways related to wound healing. [Time Frame: Throughout study]

ELIGIBILITY AND RECRUITMENT
Eligibility Criteria: * INCLUSION CRITERIA: In order to be eligible to participate in this study, an individual must meet all of the following criteria: 1. Meets one of the following: 1. Has documentation of PID confirmed by genetic evaluation demonstrating a deleterious variant in the gene (or genes) known to be associated with immune deficiency (confirmed PID); or 2. Has documented variant of undetermined significance in a gene (or genes) that is predicted to be deleterious in immune function by the investigators OR a clinical history of infections which are more frequent, more chronic, or more severe than normal (suspected PID); or 3. Has physician-diagnosed psoriasis; or 4. Has physician-diagnosed AD; or 5. Does not have clinically apparent evidence of any monogenic or digenic immune defect, AD, or psoriasis (healthy volunteers). 2. Aged 18 to 75 years. 3. Willing to allow storage of blood, biopsy tissue,
Sex/Gender: ALL
Age Limits: 18 Years to 75 Years
Accepts Healthy Volunteers: Yes
Overall Recruitment Status: RECRUITING

DATES
Study Start Date: 2021-08-10
Primary Completion Date: 2027-06-30
Study Completion Date: 2027-06-30
Record Verification Date: 2026-01-14

REGULATORY
Studies a U.S. FDA-regulated Drug Product: No
Studies a U.S. FDA-regulated Device Product: No
Availability of Expanded Access: No

SPONSOR, RESPONSIBLE PARTY AND SITES
Name of the Sponsor: National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID)
Responsible Party: Sponsor
Responsible Party Contact Information: Jodi L Blake, R.N., (301) 605-2896, jodi.blake@nih.gov
Facility Information: National Institutes of Health Clinical Center, Bethesda, United States [Individual Site Status: RECRUITING]
