CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION RECORD
Registry identifier: NCT01132079

IDENTIFICATION
Brief Title: Pimecrolimus and Epidermal Barrier Function
Official Title: Role for Pimecrolimus in Restoring Skin Barrier Function and Normalizing Epidermal Lipid Content and Differentiation in Atopic Epidermis: a Randomized, Intra-patient, Double-blind (Right/Left Arm) Study in Adults With Atopic Dermatitis Treated With 1 % Pimecrolimus Cream and 0.1 % Betamethasone Cream as Treatment Control Twice Daily for 3 Weeks
Unique Protocol Identification Number: Protocol No. ELBE-2005

DESCRIPTION
Brief Summary: This study seeks to investigate the role of pimecrolimus in restoring disturbed skin barrier function and reversing epidermal abnormalities found in atopic dermatitis (AD). The project is based on findings the investigators presented at the recent SID meeting in Providence and published in the J Invest Dermatol (122: 1423-31, 2004). The investigators research shows that AD is characterized by impaired skin barrier function, reduced stratum corneum hydration, impaired epidermal lipid composition and epidermal differentiation. In this proposed project, the investigators wish to examine the influence of pimecrolimus and betamethasone valerate on transepidermal water loss (TEWL) as a marker of the skin barrier function, on stratum corneum hydration, on stratum corneum lipid content and on epidermal differentiation regarding keratins and cornified envelope proteins in AD patients. The study involves biophysical measurements of TEWL and skin hydration, lipid analysis, immuno-histochemistry, Western blotting and micro array techniques. This study shall clarify whether pimecrolimus restores the epidermal barrier and whether this contributes to the beneficial effect of pimecrolimus on AD. O
Primary Disease or Condition Being Studied in the Trial: Atopic Dermatitis

STUDY DESIGN
Study Type: INTERVENTIONAL
Study Phase: NA
Primary Purpose: BASIC_SCIENCE
Study Design: RANDOMIZED; PARALLEL; QUADRUPLE
Enrollment: 15 [Actual]

INTERVENTIONS
Intervention Name: cream treatment
Intervention Type: DRUG

OUTCOME MEASURES
Primary Outcome Measure Information: To explore the effect of 1 % pimecrolimus cream on the epidermis in adults with AD
Secondary Outcome Measure Information: To explore the effect of 1 % pimecrolimus cream induced changes in ultra-structure and gene expression in the epidermis

ELIGIBILITY AND RECRUITMENT
Eligibility Criteria: Inclusion Criteria: Subjects may be included only if the following apply at the baseline visit (day 0, before first application of study medication). Patients to be included are: * Males and females of any race. * >= 18 years old. * Have atopic dermatitis as defined by Hanifin and Rajka criteria. * History of mild to moderate atopic dermatitis * At least 10 % of each upper limb affected by atopic dermatitis excluding the surface area of the hands, as these will not be treated in order to avoid cross-contamination. As reference: one hand (palm and fingers) corresponds to 10% of patient's upper limb surface. * One specific, representative area of the disease on each upper limb with similar size and severity on both upper limbs. These will be considered the target lesions. * A target lesion score of at least 3 to 8 (on a scale of 0-12) for both right and left target lesions and not differi
Sex/Gender: ALL
Age Limits: 18 Years
Accepts Healthy Volunteers: No
Overall Recruitment Status: COMPLETED

DATES
Study Start Date: 2005-03
Record Verification Date: 2005-03

REGULATORY
Availability of Expanded Access: No

SPONSOR, RESPONSIBLE PARTY AND SITES
Name of the Sponsor: University of Kiel
Facility Information: Dept. of Dermatology, University of Kiel, Kiel, Germany
