CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION RECORD
Registry identifier: NCT01960764

IDENTIFICATION
Brief Title: Examination of Whether Host Preconditioning Modifies Short-term Transplant Survival
Official Title: Phase 1 Study of Whether Host Preconditioning Modifies Short-term Transplant Survival
Unique Protocol Identification Number: UCSD 131244.2

DESCRIPTION
Brief Summary: Unlike healthy control skin, the skin of patients with atopic dermatitis (AD) is frequently colonized by Staphylococcus aureus (S. aureus), putting these patients at increased risk of S. aureus skin infections. In addition, research in the investigator's lab has shown that these patients have fewer protective antimicrobial Staphylococcal species such as Staphylococcal epidermidis (S. epidermidis) known to produce antimicrobial peptides that play a role in protecting the skin from invading pathogens. In this study, the investigator will attempt to decrease S. aureus colonization and increase colonization by protective Staph species. First the investigator will culture the bacteria on subjects' lesional AD skin. The investigator will selectively grow the subject's antimicrobial Staph colonies and place them into a base moisturizer. The moisturizer plus bacteria will be applied to both of the subject's arms. Prior to applying this, though, one arm will first be pre-treated with an antimicrobial regiment of Dial liquid antibacterial soap and alcohol. We will then compare the abundance of antimicrobial Staph species on each subject's arms 24 hours later to determine whether the pre-trea
Primary Disease or Condition Being Studied in the Trial: Atopic Dermatitis, Eczema

STUDY DESIGN
Study Type: INTERVENTIONAL
Study Phase: PHASE1
Primary Purpose: TREATMENT
Study Design: NON_RANDOMIZED; PARALLEL; SINGLE
Enrollment: 0 [Actual]

INTERVENTIONS
Intervention Name: Pre-Treatment with Dial liquid antibacterial soap
Intervention Type: DRUG
Intervention Description: This arm will be pre-treated with Dial liquid antibacterial soap and alcohol prior to the autologous microbiome transplant.
Intervention Name: Control
Intervention Type: OTHER
Other Intervention Name: This arm will not be pre-treated, but rather will have the autologous microbiome transplant cream applied without any pre-treatment regimen.

OUTCOME MEASURES
Primary Outcome Measure Information: Abundance of antimicrobial Staph colonies [Time Frame: 24-hours post-transplant]
Secondary Outcome Measure Information: Adverse events [Time Frame: 24 hours post-transplant]

ELIGIBILITY AND RECRUITMENT
Eligibility Criteria: Inclusion Criteria: * Male or female subjects who are not pregnant or lactating * 18-80 years of age * Diagnosis of atopic dermatitis for at least 6 months using the Hanifin and Rajka Diagnostic Criteria for atopic dermatitis * Presence of lesional atopic dermatitis skin in both antecubital fossae * Positive S. aureus colonization based on results of a skin culture taken from one of their AD-affected antecubital fossae during the screening visit Exclusion Criteria: * Use of any topical AD treatments (including topical steroids, topical calcineurin inhibitors) to either arm within one week of either screening visit * Use of any oral/systemic AD therapies (antihistamines, steroids) within 28 days of either screening visit * Severe AD that would worsen significantly from holding a participant's usual topical/oral AD medications for the time periods required in the inclusion/exclusion criter
Sex/Gender: ALL
Age Limits: 18 Years to 80 Years
Accepts Healthy Volunteers: No
Overall Recruitment Status: WITHDRAWN
Why Study Stopped: This sub-study was not done because main study results reached significance.

DATES
Study Start Date: 2016-06
Primary Completion Date: 2022-06
Study Completion Date: 2022-12
Record Verification Date: 2020-11

REGULATORY
Availability of Expanded Access: No

SPONSOR, RESPONSIBLE PARTY AND SITES
Name of the Sponsor: University of California, San Diego
Responsible Party: Principal Investigator — Richard Gallo, Professor and Chief, Division of Dermatology
Facility Information: UCSD Division of Dermatology, San Diego, United States
