CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION RECORD
Registry identifier: NCT04125459

IDENTIFICATION
Brief Title: Assessing the Role of the NLRP3 Inflammasome in Intercritical Gout
Official Title: Assessing the Role of the NLRP3 Inflammasome in Driving Inflammation in Affected Joints of Patients With Intercritical Gout
Unique Protocol Identification Number: 36549

DESCRIPTION
Brief Summary: Gout is an autoinflammatory disease characterized by flares of painful joint inflammation. This inflammation occurs in response to uric acid that crystallizes. After a gout attack, patients usually enter a period that is accompanied by low grade inflammation but is otherwise relatively asymptomatic. Gout is typically associated with certain markers, and this study is going describe specific markers in patients that are in between gout attacks. Research has been focused on studying this phase between gout attacks in hopes to manage and prevent the onset of future gout attacks. Biopsies will be taken from the affected joint and blood will be drawn from patients who are currently in between gout attacks. This work will provide important information regarding how crystals in the joint lining are associated with chronic inflammation in the periods between gout attacks. Moreover, this study will identify novel biomarkers that may be useful in determining the severity of disease activity through a blood test.
Primary Disease or Condition Being Studied in the Trial: Gout

STUDY DESIGN
Study Type: OBSERVATIONAL
Enrollment: 8 [Estimated]

INTERVENTIONS
Intervention Name: Joint Biopsy
Intervention Type: PROCEDURE
Intervention Description: a synovial biopsy of a joint that has been affected by a gout attack

OUTCOME MEASURES
Primary Outcome Measure Information: NLRP3 Inflammasome Role in Driving Inflammation in Intercritical Gout [Time Frame: Up to 2 months]
Primary Outcome Measure Information: IL-1B Role in Driving Inflammation in Intercritical Gout [Time Frame: Up to 2 months]
Secondary Outcome Measure Information: Microcrystal Correlation [Time Frame: Up to 2 months]
Secondary Outcome Measure Information: Immune Cell Infiltration in the Inflamed Joint Correlation [Time Frame: Up to 2 months]
Secondary Outcome Measure Information: Uric Acid Levels Correlation [Time Frame: Up to 2 months]

ELIGIBILITY AND RECRUITMENT
Eligibility Criteria: Inclusion Criteria: 1. Adult patients with gout diagnosed by a Rheumatologist. 2. patients with a history of at least two gout attacks in the target joint 3. Patients with a target joint amenable to biopsy. Target joint defined as: Joint that has been affected by acute gout attack at least twice in the 12 months prior to enrollment. Ultrasound finds grade 2 gray-scale synovitis in joint. Joint is amenable to biopsy. At the time of enrollment, the joint is without signs of acute inflammation: redness, swelling, and severe pain (>7/10). Exclusion Criteria: 1. Patients on anti-coagulation therapy. 2. Patients with an active infection. 3. Tophus present at the biopsy site. 4. Target joint with signs of acute gout attack (pain >7/10, redness, warmth) 5. Known chondrocalcinosis
Sex/Gender: ALL
Age Limits: 18 Years
Accepts Healthy Volunteers: Yes
Overall Recruitment Status: ACTIVE_NOT_RECRUITING

DATES
Study Start Date: 2020-01-22
Primary Completion Date: 2021-03-01
Study Completion Date: 2024-10-03
Record Verification Date: 2024-08

REGULATORY
Studies a U.S. FDA-regulated Drug Product: No
Studies a U.S. FDA-regulated Device Product: No
Availability of Expanded Access: No

SPONSOR, RESPONSIBLE PARTY AND SITES
Name of the Sponsor: Attune Health Research, Inc.
Responsible Party: Principal Investigator — Swamy Venuturupalli, Founder of Attune Health, Attending Rheumatologist at Cedar Sinai Medical Center, Associate Clinical Professor of Medicine at UCLA
Facility Information: Attune Health Research Inc., Beverly Hills, United States
