CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION RECORD
Registry identifier: NCT00981370

IDENTIFICATION
Brief Title: Clinical Importance of Treating Iron Overload in Sickle Cell Disease
Official Title: Clinical Importance of Treating Iron Overload in Sickle Cell Disease
Unique Protocol Identification Number: CICL670AUS30T

DESCRIPTION
Brief Summary: Hypothesis: The investigators suspect that significant degrees of iron overload in subjects with SCD result in decreased red cell survival, abnormal endothelial function and markedly dysregulated autonomic function. Furthermore, the investigators anticipate that the magnitude of these effects is proportional not only to the magnitude of total body iron stores but also to the duration of exposure to the high iron levels in tissues. Primary objective To determine if red cell survival as assessed by 51Cr red cell survival analysis, hemoglobin level, reticulocyte count, lactic acid dehydrogenase, and plasma hemoglobin in sickle cell patients is related to the degree of iron overload. Secondary objective(s) 1. Determine if the magnitude of endothelial-dependant vasodilation is related to The degree of iron overload. 2. Determine if the degree of change in cardiac beat to beat variability in response to hypoxic exposure or to cold exposure ("cold-face-test") is related the magnitude of iron overload. The primary measure of iron overload will be MRI determination of liver iron concentration.
Primary Disease or Condition Being Studied in the Trial: Anemia, Sickle Cell, Transfusion Hemosiderosis

STUDY DESIGN
Study Type: INTERVENTIONAL
Study Phase: PHASE3
Primary Purpose: TREATMENT
Study Design: NA; SINGLE_GROUP; NONE
Enrollment: 1 [Actual]

INTERVENTIONS
Intervention Name: deferasirox
Intervention Type: DRUG
Intervention Description: Treatment starting dose of 20mg/kg/day based on subjects baseline LIC (liver iron concentration) and gradually escalate the dose to a maximum of 35 mg/kg/day based upon toxicity. Duration is up to a max of 12 months.
Other Intervention Name: Exjade

OUTCOME MEASURES
Primary Outcome Measure Information: To Determine if Red Cell Survival as Assessed by Hemoglobin Level, Reticulocyte Count, Lactic Acid Dehydrogenase, and Plasma Hemoglobin in Sickle Cell Patients is Related to the Degree of Iron Overload [Time Frame: Baseline, 6 months and 12 months]

ELIGIBILITY AND RECRUITMENT
Eligibility Criteria: Inclusion Criteria: * Male or female patients with sickle cell anemia (SS or SB thalassemia) with transfusional iron overload. * Currently not on chronic or frequent transfusion * Age equal or greater then 14 years * Patients with iron overload from repeated blood transfusion, as defined by one of the following: 1. For patients greater then 16 years old receiving simple transfusions: estimated lifetime history of receipt of at least 100 ml/kg or 15 adult units of packed red blood cells, OR 2. For patients equal to or less then 16 years old receiving simple transfusions: estimated lifetime history of receipt of at least 100 ml/kg of packed red blood cells, OR 3. For any patient: liver iron content equal/greater then 3 mg Fe/g dw as measured by biopsy or magnetic resonance imaging who have not been adequately chelated since that measurement, OR 4. a serum ferritin equal/greater then 1000 n
Sex/Gender: ALL
Age Limits: 14 Years
Accepts Healthy Volunteers: No
Overall Recruitment Status: TERMINATED
Why Study Stopped: 1 consented patient never started on study drug, lost to follow up

DATES
Study Start Date: 2009-04
Primary Completion Date: 2010-10
Study Completion Date: 2010-12
Record Verification Date: 2016-12

REGULATORY
Availability of Expanded Access: No

SPONSOR, RESPONSIBLE PARTY AND SITES
Name of the Sponsor: Children's Hospital Los Angeles
Responsible Party: Principal Investigator — Thomas Coates, Division Head of Hematology
Facility Information: Childrens Hospital Los Angeles, Los Angeles, United States
